t h e oxfor d shak esp ear e
  General Editor · Stanley Wells
For Sam Neill
    th e oxf or d s h a k e s pe a r e



Othello, the Moor of Venice
        edited by michael neill




      CLARENDON PRESS • OXFORD
                2006
                            3
                   Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
      Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
 It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
                  and education by publishing worldwide in
                               Oxford New York
          Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
           Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
                    New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
                            With ofﬁces in
     Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan South Korea Poland Portugal Singapore
     South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
                       Published in the United States
                  by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
                            © Michael Neill 2006
             The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
              Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
                             First published 2006
      All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
 stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
      without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
    reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
   outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
                  Oxford University Press, at the address above
       You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
         and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
               British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                                Data available
             Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
                               Data available
                 ISBN 0-19-812920-3 978-0-19-812920-2
               ISBN 0-19-281451-(pbk) 978-0-19-281451-7
                           10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
            Typeset by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong
                          Printed in Great Britain
                           on acid-free paper by
                     Biddles Ltd., King’s Lynn, Norfolk
                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


The list of those who have helped me since I began work on this
edition in 1997 has become a long one. I am indebted to the gener-
osity of the Folger Shakespeare Library and of Trinity College,
Cambridge, for visiting fellowships, to the New Zealand Marsden
Foundation for a research award, and to the University of
Auckland through grants of leave in 1997–8, 2002, and 2005. I re-
ceived unstinting assistance from the staff of the libraries whose
resources I have quarried, including the University of Auckland
Library, the Auckland City Library, the Harvard Theatre Collec-
tion, the Library of Congress, the library of the Shakespeare
Centre in Stratford-upon-Avon, the library of the London Theatre
Museum, the archives of the Royal National Theatre of Great
Britain, Cambridge University Library, and above all the Folger
Shakespeare Library. My gratitude to the Folger includes the kind-
ness of a long list of resident and visiting scholars, including
Barbara Mowat, Gail Paster, Georgianna Ziegler, Peter Blayney,
Leslie Thomson, Linda Levy Peck, the late Susan Snyder, Jeff
Masten, Meredith Skura, Albert Braunmuller, and Linda Austern.
I am especially indebted to Professor Austern for her excellent
appendix on the music in the play.
   Elsewhere, Edward Pechter, Patricia Parker, Anne Barton, Jean
Howard, Janet Adelman, John Kerrigan, Jocelyn Harris, Jyotsna
Singh, and Graham Bradshaw have done their best to inform my
critical judgement, while Paul Werstine, Tom Berger, and Mac
Jackson have offered invaluable textual expertise. With exceptional
consideration, Ernst Honigmann ensured that I received an
advance copy of his new Arden edition; Louise Noble shared the
fruits of her research into early modern medicine; and Charles
Edelman was equally helpful in military matters. I am grateful
above all to my colleague Bruno Ferraro for his meticulous transla-
tion of the source novella from Giraldi Cinthio’s Hecatommithi.
   I have learned a great deal from the insights of theatre profes-
sionals, among them Patrick Stewart, Lisa Harrow, and Bruce
Purchase. I owe a particular debt to Jude Kelly and her cast from
the Washington Shakespeare Company for allowing me to sit in on
                                v
                        Acknowledgements

rehearsals for her ‘photo-negative’ production; and to the staff of
the Brooklyn Academy of Music who made certain that I received
tickets for Sam Mendes’s National Theatre production when it
reached Brooklyn.
   Needless to say, I owe much to the patience and learning of the
General Editor, Stanley Wells, as well as to the professionalism of
staff at Oxford University Press, especially Frances Whistler,
Sophie Goldsworthy, Tom Perridge, and my copy-editor, Christine
Buckley, whose sharp eye and scholarly acumen have been invalu-
able. As always I am grateful to colleagues at the University of
Auckland for numerous kindnesses—especially Sebastian Black,
Judith Binney, Albert Wendt, Terry Sturm, Ken Larsen, Sophie
Tomlinson, and Margaret Edgcumbe. Finally, I must thank Kubé
Jones-Neill, whose ungrudging support included more proof-
reading than any wife should be asked to undertake.
                                                  michael neill




                                vi
                          CONTENTS



List of Illustrations                         ix

Introduction                                   1
  Reception                                    1
  Sources                                     16
     Setting, Characters, and Plot            18
     The Time Scheme                          33
  The Play in Performance                     36
     Playing Black                            40
     Othello and Iago                         71
     Desdemona                               100
     Emilia and Bianca                       106
     Cassio and Roderigo                     111
  Interpretation                             113
     Reading Blackness                       113
     ‘Othello’ and Discovery                 130
     ‘Othello’ and the Monstrous             138
     Place, Ofﬁce, and Occupation            147
     Love, Service, and Identity             158
     The Place of Women                      169
     Conclusion                              177

Editorial Procedures                         181
  Abbreviations and References               183

THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE   195

appendix a
  The Date of the Play                       399

appendix b
  The Texts of the Play                      405
    The Textual Problem                      405
    Quarto and Folio                         406
                                 vii
                              Contents

     The Scholarly Debate                                    411
     Conclusion                                              430

appendix c
Giraldi Cinthio: ‘Gli Hecatommithi’, Third Decade, Seventh
  Novella Translated by Bruno Ferraro                        434

appendix d
  The Music in the Play by Linda Phyllis Austern             445

appendix e
  Alterations to Lineation                                   455

appendix f
  Longer Notes                                               461

Index                                                        469




                                 viii
                    LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



1. James Earl Jones as Othello, Christopher Plummer as Iago
   (Stratford, Connecticut, 1981)                                4
     (harvard theatre collection)
2. Map illustrating Ralegh’s Discoverie of . . . Guiana, from
   Theodor de Bry, America pars VIII (Frankfurt, 1599)           21
     (folger shakespeare library)
3. German reliquary statue of the black St Maurice, 1525–7
   (Heiltumsbuch, fol. 227v)                                     27
     (hofbibliothek, aschaffenburg)
4. The bedchamber scene: engraving by François Boitard (?)
   in Nicholas Rowe’s edition of Shakespeare’s Works (1709)      38
     (folger shakespeare library)
5. The bedchamber scene: engraving by George Noble from
   a painting by Josiah Boydell for the Boydell Gallery, 1800    39
     (folger shakespeare library)
6. The burlesque tradition: the wooing of Desdemona.
   Illustration from Othello: An Interesting Drama, Rather
   (London, [c.1850])                                            43
     (folger shakespeare library)
7. Moors, from C. Vecellio, De Gli Habiti Antichi et Moderni
   (Venice, 1590)                                                46
     (folger shakespeare library)
8. Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree as Othello, Phyllis Neilson-Terry
   as Desdemona (His Majesty’s Theatre, London, 1912)            48
     (victoria and albert museum)
9. Ira Aldridge as Othello                                       51
     (folger shakespeare library)
10. Paul Robeson as Othello, with Peggy Ashcroft as Desdemona
    (Savoy Theatre, 1930)                                        53
     (victoria and albert museum)
11. Edmund Kean as Iago (1814)                                   73
     (harvard theatre collection)

                                      ix
                           List of Illustrations

12. Edwin Booth as Iago                                                76
      (photograph by sarony; folger shakespeare library)
13. Edmund Kean as Othello                                             81
      (folger shakespeare library)
14. William Charles Macready as Othello                                82
      (folger shakespeare library)
15. Sir Laurence Olivier as Othello, Frank Finlay as Iago
    (National Theatre, London, 1964)                                   87
      (photograph by angus mcbean. © the harvard theatre collection.
      the houghton library)
16. Simon Russell Beale as Iago (Royal National Theatre,
    London, 1997)                                                      97
      (photograph by mark douet)
17. The Temptation Scene: Paul Robeson as Othello, José Ferrer
    as Iago (Shubert Theatre, New York, 1943)                          141
      (harvard theatre collection)




                                     x
                              INTRODUCTION

Reception
‘Othello’, in the words of Edward Pechter, ‘has become the tragedy
of choice for the present generation.’1 If the existential ‘prison’ of
Hamlet was the place in which generations of post-Romantic intel-
lectuals, following the example of Goethe and Coleridge, found the
angst-ridden image of their own alienation; if, in the wake of
World War II, it was the wasteland of King Lear that provided a mir-
ror for humanity living under the shadow of holocaust and nuclear
devastation; then, towards the close of the twentieth century, it
was Othello that began to displace them both, as critics and direc-
tors alike began to trace in the cultural, religious, and ethnic ani-
mosities of its Mediterranean setting, the genealogy of the racial
conﬂicts that fractured their own societies. Othello, the black pro-
tagonist of Murray Carlin’s play Not Now, Sweet Desdemona had
declared in 1969, ‘[was] the ﬁrst play of the Age of Imperialism’:
written (as this ‘Othello’ reminds his white interlocutor) just ten
years after the Portuguese consolidated their control of the East
African littoral with the establishment of Fort Jesus in Mombasa, it
necessarily also became a play about that most malign legacy of
empire, colour—‘the ﬁrst play about colour that ever was written.
. . . Othello is about colour, and nothing but colour’.2 Carlin’s
reworking of Shakespeare’s tragedy now has a prophetic look to it,
for it is as a foundational document in the history of ‘race’ that
much recent criticism has treated the play.
    Yet Othello was not always approached in these terms: perhaps
the most striking thing about the very earliest responses to the
tragedy is that they pay no attention to what, from a modern per-
spective, seems its most conspicuous feature—the interracial love
affair at the centre of the action. In his brief comments on the per-
formance he saw at Oxford in 1610, the academic Henry Jackson
did not even trouble to notice ‘race’ as an issue in the play; and his


   1
       Edward Pechter, Othello and Interpretive Traditions (Iowa City, 1999), p. 2.
   2
       Murray Carlin, Not Now, Sweet Desdemona (Nairobi, 1969), pp. 31–2.

                                           1
                                  Introduction

seeming indifference was shared by a mid-century reader of plays,
the clergyman Abraham Wright, whose notebooks praise the char-
acterization of ‘Iago for a rogue and Othello for a jealous husband’,
but make no mention of the protagonist’s colour.1 Indeed, the con-
tention of Carlin’s white antagonist that Othello is ﬁrst and fore-
most a tragedy of jealousy would probably have caused little demur
before the last third of the twentieth century—even if from the end
of the seventeenth century, as we shall see, the hero’s colour was
capable of generating the most intense anxiety amongst viewers
and critics alike.
   However, although controversy over matters of race has played
an increasingly signiﬁcant role in the play’s reception history,
there are other, more strictly dramaturgical reasons why that his-
tory has been unusually vexed and contradictory. From the time of
its ﬁrst performance, somewhere between 1601 and 1604 (see
Appendix A), the romantic cast of the story made Othello one of
Shakespeare’s most popular and frequently performed plays; yet its
claim to rank amongst the greatest tragedies has been challenged
by critics who have found its plot too strained, its characters too
improbable, and its tale of marital jealousy and murder too
meanly domestic to challenge comparison with Hamlet, King Lear,
Macbeth, or even that saga of tragic infatuation, Antony and
Cleopatra. In the theatre—despite its long dependence on the fun-
damentally implausible pretence that the white actor playing the
hero was a black man—Othello has proved remarkable for its abil-
ity to overwhelm audience disbelief and to compel extraordinary
identiﬁcation with the suffering of its central characters.
   In the Jacobean and Caroline periods Othello seems to have
enjoyed widespread popularity and admiration, inspiring numer-
ous dramatic imitations, and attracting more contemporary allu-
sions than any other Shakespeare tragedy.2 It seems clear that
it was equally well liked at the Globe, where it was probably
ﬁrst performed, and at the more exclusive Blackfriars, which


  1
    British Library Add. MS 22608, fol. 84v, cited in Sasha Roberts, ‘Shakespeare’s
Tragedies of Love’, in Richard Dutton and Jean E. Howard (eds.), A Companion to
Shakespeare’s Works: The Tragedies (Oxford, 2003), 108–33 (p. 121).
  2
    See G. E. Bentley, Shakespeare and Jonson, Their Reputations in the Seventeenth
Century Compared (Chicago, 1945), p. 113; and cf. Marvin Rosenberg, The Masks of
Othello (Berkeley, Calif., 1961; repr. Newark, Del., n.d.), pp. 258–9 n. 2.

                                        2
                             Introduction

Shakespeare’s company used as a winter house from about 1609.
We know of revivals in 1610 (at the Globe), in 1629 and in 1635 (at
the Blackfriars); but in a period of scanty records, there are likely to
have been many performances for which no documentation sur-
vives. Othello’s appearance at Oxford in 1610 indicates not only that
it was popular enough to be taken on tour, but that it was expected
to appeal to an elite university audience as well. Evidently it was
just as highly regarded at Court, which was the site of its ﬁrst
recorded performance, at the Banqueting House in Whitehall on 1
November 1604. It was brought back as one of the entertainments
for Princess Elizabeth’s wedding to the Elector Palatine in the win-
ter of 1612/13, and performed again for Charles I and Henrietta
Maria in 1636. The play’s frequent revivals may help to account for
the fact that it has been preserved in two distinct versions, the
Quarto of 1622 and the Folio of 1623, whose differences reﬂect the
exceptional ﬂuidity of performance texts in the early modern
theatre (see Appendix B).
   Othello’s early popularity was maintained after the Interregnum,
when it was probably the ﬁrst of Shakespeare’s tragedies to grace
the re-established London stage; and it enjoyed continuing favour
throughout the Restoration period. This was, however, also the
period that witnessed the earliest systematic critique of the play—
one that set the terms for a great deal of subsequent debate. In his
Short View of Tragedy (1693), Thomas Rymer prefaced a blistering
attack on Shakespeare’s dramaturgy by admitting the high esteem
in which this work was held: noting that ‘[f]rom all the tragedies
acted on our English stage, Othello is said to bear the bell away’, he
identiﬁed Iago’s temptation of Othello (3.3) as ‘the top scene, the
scene that raises Othello above all other tragedies on our theatres’
(pp. 86, 118). But he denounced the play for the rank implausibil-
ity of its characterization and plotting: ‘[n]othing’, he wrote, ‘is
more odious in nature than an improbable lie; and, certainly,
never was any play fraught, like this of Othello, with improbabil-
ities’ (p. 92). No sensible audience, Rymer believed, could possibly
be taken in by the absurdities of its design: even were they to over-
look the unlikelihood of the central relationship between a sup-
posed ‘blackamoor’ general and an aristocratic Venetian woman,
and to ignore the gross indecorum of presenting a soldier as the
conniving villain of the piece (pp. 91–4), the palpable inconsisten-
cies of the time scheme meant that playgoers ‘must deny their
                                   3
                                  Introduction




      1. ‘The Tragedy of the Handkerchief’: James Earl Jones as Othello,
         Christopher Plummer as Iago (Stratford, Connecticut, 1981).


senses, to reconcile it to common sense’.1 Moreover, in view of the
ludicrous device chosen to trigger the hero’s jealousy, he declared
that the play had better have been ‘called The Tragedy of the
Handkerchief’:
Had it been Desdemona’s garter, the sagacious Moor might have smelt a
rat: but the handkerchief is so remote a triﬂe, no booby on this side Mau-
retania could make any consequence of it. . . . Yet we ﬁnd it entered our
poet’s head to make a tragedy of this triﬂe.2

Everywhere he looked, Rymer found monstrous breaches of tragic
decorum in the treatment of fable and characters: arguing that
Othello’s ‘love and . . . jealousy are no part of a soldier’s character,
unless for comedy’, he concluded that while ‘There is in this play
some burlesque, some humour, and ramble of comical wit, some
show, and some mimicry to divert the spectators . . . the tragical
  1
    Rymer, p. 123, and cf. pp. 115, 120, 126–7, 132.
  2
    Rymer, pp. 114–16, 139–40, 145. Rymer’s sneer is remembered in the title of
Paula Vogel’s feminist reworking of Othello, Desdemona: A Play about a Handkerchief,
in Daniel Fischlin and Mark Fortier (eds.), Adaptations of Shakespeare (London and
New York, 2000).

                                         4
                                   Introduction

part is plainly none other than a bloody farce, without salt or
savour’; even the widely admired temptation scene reminded him
of commedia dell’arte—‘such scenes as this have made all the world
run after Harlequin and Scaramuccio’.1
   Recent work examining the ‘comic matrix’ of the play’s design,2
like the long-running debate over its use of so-called ‘double
time’,3 show that, however obtuse Rymer’s overall response, his
complaints about plot and decorum were not as foolish as they
have often been made to appear. Shakespeare himself sometimes
appears to draw deliberate attention to his juggling with comic
convention: even in the tragic catastrophe, when Emilia de-
nounces Othello as a ‘murderous coxcomb’ (5.2.234), her oxy-
moron makes scornful play with the traditionally ridiculous ﬁgure
of the jealous cuckold. Nor is Rymer the only critic to have ques-
tioned the fundamental believability of Othello: many of his criti-
cisms were to be echoed two centuries later by no less a critic than
Bernard Shaw, who not only denounced the fable for its ‘police-
court morality and commonplace thought’, but excoriated the plot
for ‘its farcical trick with a handkerchief’.4 Reviewing a production
  1
      Rymer, pp. 93, 146, 118–19; cf. also pp. 110, 112.
  2
      Contemporary criticism has been more sympathetic to what it sees as
Shakespeare’s deliberate manipulation of comic conventions: see Susan Snyder, The
Comic Matrix of Shakespeare’s Tragedies (Princeton, 1979), pp. 70–4; Stanley Cavell,
Disowning Knowledge in Six Plays of Shakespeare (Cambridge, 1987), pp. 132–3;
Michael Bristol, ‘Charivari and the Comedy of Abjection in Othello’, Renaissance
Drama, ns 21 (1990), 3–21, and repr. in Linda Woodbridge and Edward Berry (eds.),
True Rites and Maimed Rites: Ritual and Anti-Ritual in Shakespeare and His Age
(Urbana, Ill., 1992), 75–97; Peter J. Smith, ‘ “A good soft pillow for that good white
head”: Othello as comedy’, Sydney Studies in English, 24 (1998–9), 21–39; Robert
Hornback, ‘Emblems of Folly in the First Othello: Renaissance Blackface, Moor’s
Coat, and “Muckender” ’, Comparative Drama, 35 (2001), 69–99; and Stephen Orgel,
‘Othello and the End of Comedy’, SS 56 (2003), 105–16.
   3
      See below, ‘Sources’, pp. 33–6.
   4
      Edwin Wilson (ed.), Shaw on Shakespeare (New York, 1961; repr. Har-
mondsworth, 1969), p. 252; Bernard Shaw, Our Theatres in the Nineties, 3 vols.
(1948), iii. 315. More recently, the negative side of Shaw has been echoed by the
black actor Hugh Quarshie, who argues not only that the play presents an entirely
conventional portrait of an African ‘with little in the way of plausible psychological
motivation’, but that the coincidences of the plot strain the credulity of the audi-
ence, while ‘Shakespeare’s attempts to tie up the loose . . . threads at the end of the
play invite derision’ (Second Thoughts About Othello, International Shakespeare
Association Occasional Paper 7 (Chipping Campden, 1999), pp. 8, 19). See also Her-
bert Kretzmer’s description of the play, when reviewing the 1964 Dexter/Olivier
production, as ‘a surface-scratching melodrama’ that nevertheless ‘remains sub-
lime’, given an Othello of sufﬁcient ‘largeness, mystery and . . . human vulnerabil-
ity’ (Daily Express, 22 Apr. 1964).

                                          5
                                    Introduction

in 1897, he called Othello ‘pure melodrama’; yet even Shaw found
himself reluctantly moved by the power of its language, admitting
that for all its ‘superﬁciality and staginess, [Othello] remains mag-
niﬁcent by the volume of its passion and the splendor of its word-
music, which sweep the scenes up to a plane on which sense is
drowned in sound. The words do not convey ideas: they are stream-
ing ensigns and tossing branches to make the tempest of passion
visible. . . . Tested by the brain, it is ridiculous: tested by the ear, it
is sublime.’1
   The force of Rymer’s and Shaw’s complaints about the plot is
well illustrated by the fate of various attempts to rewrite the play in
alternative genres. In the case of Verdi’s Otello—as we might expect
from Shaw’s remarks about the opera-like qualities of Othello itself
and the seductiveness of its word-music—the sheer power of the
score is enough to overwhelm any reservations about the plausibil-
ity of the action. But in the case of two recent screen versions, the
effect of translating the play into a contemporary idiom was to
reduce it to banal risibility. Tim Blake Nelson’s 2001 ﬁlm O turns
Othello into ‘Odin James’ (Mekhi Phifer), the black star and captain
of an otherwise white high-school basketball team, who falls for
the principal’s beautiful daughter, Desi (Julia Stiles), only to be
destroyed by the machinations of his envious friend Hugo (Josh
Hartnett), the son of coach Duke Goulding; despite its knowing

   1
      Wilson (ed.), Shaw on Shakespeare, pp. 171–2. In his later essay on Verdi (1901),
Shaw was rather less complimentary about the play’s word-music: ‘the truth is that
instead of Otello being an Italian opera written in the style of Shakespear, Othello is
a play written in the style of Italian opera. . . . Desdemona is a prima donna, with
handkerchief, conﬁdant, and vocal solo all complete . . . Othello’s transports are
conveyed by a magniﬁcent but senseless music which rages from the Propontick to
the Hellespont in an orgy of thundering sound and bounding rhythm; and the plot
is a pure farce plot: that is to say, it is supported on an artiﬁcially manufactured and
desperately precarious trick with a handkerchief which a chance word might upset
at any moment. With such a libretto, Verdi was quite at home: his success with it
proves, not that he could occupy Shakespear’s plane, but that Shakespear could on
occasion occupy his, which is a very different matter’ (pp. 174–5). Rymer similarly
acknowledged the pleasing ‘sound’ of Shakespeare’s verse (p. 124), but thought it
largely empty of sense: ‘In the neighing of an horse, or in the growling of a mastiff,
there is a meaning, there is as lively expression, and, may I say, more humanity,
than many times in the tragical ﬂights of Shakespeare’ (pp. 85–6). For two usefully
complementary essays exploring the ways in which Verdi and his librettist, Boito,
adapted Shakespeare’s tragedy, see Frank Kermode, ‘Shakespeare and Boito’, in
Pieces of My Mind (New York, 2003), 357–73, and Graham Bradshaw, ‘Metaferoci-
ties: Representation in Othello and Otello’, Shakespearean International Yearbook, 3
(2003), 336–56.

                                           6
                                   Introduction

allusions to Shakespeare (‘I thought he wrote movies,’ says Hugo)
and to Verdi’s Otello (Nelson opens with the ‘Ave Maria’, and
ends with the ‘Credo’ as Hugo is led away by the police), the un-
relievedly pedestrian screenplay and the telescoping of the action
to ninety-one minutes reduce the play to precisely the improbable
melodrama described by Shaw. Little more can be said for Andrew
Davies’s television play, Othello, misleadingly subtitled, A Modern
Masterpiece: here Shakespeare’s Moor becomes ‘John Othello’
(Eamonn Walker), London’s ﬁrst black Police Commissioner,
whose promotion—together with his marriage to the upper-class
Dessie Brabant (Keeley Hawes)—provokes the bitter resentment of
his deputy, Ben Jago (Christopher Eccleston), a closet racist whose
pretence of loyal friendship is complicated by frustrated homosex-
ual desire. Like O, Davies’s play is full of self-conscious homages to
the original, including a bed decorated in Venetian Gothic, as well
as an epilogue spoken by Jago in which he paraphrases a familiar
critical debate about Othello: ‘Don’t talk to me about race, don’t
talk to me about politics: it was love—simple as that.’ A perfect
index to the banality of Davies’s conception is the replacement of
Desdemona’s magically imbrued handkerchief with a falsiﬁed
DNA test.
   For Shaw’s contemporary, the critic A. C. Bradley, Othello re-
mained ‘the most painfully exciting and the most terrible’ of all
Shakespeare’s tragedies; yet he was forced to concede that for many
readers the meanness of its subject, ‘sexual jealousy’, rendered the
play ‘not merely painful, but so repulsive that not even the intense
tragic emotions which the story generates can overcome this repul-
sion’.1 It may well be, however, that for most audiences it is pre-
cisely this combination of the mean and repulsive with the most
tragic intensity that accounts for the play’s exceptional power to
move. This at least is what is suggested by the response of an anony-
mous Romantic critic to the play’s yoking of opposites: on the one
hand, its emotions seem almost painfully familiar:
Othello is a faithful portrait of the life with which we are daily and hourly
conversant; love and jealousy are passions which all men, with few excep-
tions, have at some time felt; the imitation of them, therefore, ﬁnds an
immediate sympathy in every mind; Othello has no feelings that we should
not ourselves have in his situation.

    1
        A. C. Bradley, Shakespearean Tragedy (1904; repr. 1961), pp. 143, 148–9.

                                          7
                                   Introduction

On the other hand, it endows these feelings with an awful, super-
human sublimity:
it resembles a thunderstorm, which awes by its magniﬁcence of terror; in
fact it is grand beyond loveliness; the word beauty might as well be applied
to the terrors of an earthquake, or the heights of the Andes.1

   The emotional force of Shakespeare’s poetry, especially in the
last three acts, can indeed be devastating: for the normally sober Dr
Johnson, even the experience of editing the play was almost more
than he could bear: ‘I am glad I have ended my revisal of this
dreadful scene,’ he wrote of Othello’s ending, ‘it is not to be
endured’;2 while the Variorum editor H. H. Furness, reﬂecting on
the ‘unutterable agony’ produced by the scene, wished ‘that . . .
this tragedy had never been written’.3
   The play’s performance history provides ample testimony of its
continuing power to move onlookers—sometimes to an extrava-
gant degree. The French novelist Stendhal recorded an extraordin-
ary event during an American performance in 1822: ‘a soldier
who was on guard duty inside the Baltimore theatre, seeing Othel-
lo . . . was about to kill Desdemona’, intervened to protect her: ‘ “It
will never be said that in my presence a confounded Negro has
killed a white woman!” he shouted, and then ﬁred his gun . . .
breaking the arm of the actor who was playing Othello.’4 ‘A year
does not go by’, Stendhal claimed, ‘without the newspapers report-
ing similar stories.’ Such absolute surrender to the power of Shake-
speare’s theatrical ﬁction would have astonished Rymer; yet the
most conspicuous feature of the play’s theatrical life has been pre-
cisely this extraordinary capacity to swamp aesthetic detach-
ment—even to the point where (as in the case of the Baltimore
guard) the boundary between ﬁction and reality has sometimes

   1
      Cited from the prefatory ‘Remarks’ in Othello ‘As it is performed at the Theatre
Royal’ (1819).
   2
      Quoted in James R. Siemon, ‘ “Nay, that’s not next”: Othello, V.ii in Perform-
ance, 1760–1900’, SQ 37 (1986), 38–51 (p. 39).
   3
      Furness, p. 300.
   4
      Stendhal, From Racine to Shakespeare (1823), in Jonathan Bate (ed.), The Roman-
tics on Shakespeare (1992), 218–37 (p. 222). Only slightly less extravagant was the
interjection of an audience member responding to Edwin Forrest’s Iago in
1825: ‘You damn’d lying scoundrel, I would like to get hold of you after the show
is over and wring your infernal neck’—cited in Julie Hankey (ed.), Plays in Perform-
ance: Othello (Bristol, 1987), p. 1.

                                          8
                                   Introduction

appeared to dissolve altogether.1 This has reputedly been true not
only for audiences, but for performers: according to a persistent
theatrical legend, famously exploited in Marcel Carné’s ﬁlm Les
Enfants du Paradis, as well as in George Cukor’s A Double Life, actors
playing Othello and Iago are especially liable to carry over their
roles into their offstage lives.2 This is precisely what seems to have
happened after a performance by British ofﬁcers and their wives in
Freetown, Sierra Leone, in 1857: the commanding ofﬁcer, who
played Othello, shot his Cassio in cold blood, provoking a public
scandal over heavy drinking and sexual promiscuity amongst the
garrison community. In 1942 Paul Robeson’s adulterous affair
with Uta Hagen, his second Desdemona and wife of his Iago, José
Ferrer, made it seem as if ‘the actors were taken over by their
roles’.3
   From the very beginning playgoers have recorded the emotional
impact of Othello: in his note on the 1610 Oxford performance,
Henry Jackson wrote of its power to move the onlookers to tears,
especially in the scene where ‘the celebrated Desdemona, slain in
our presence by her husband . . . entreated the pity of the specta-
tors by her very countenance’.4 Numerous later anecdotes conﬁrm
Jackson’s testimony to the work’s disturbing emotional effect.
Samuel Pepys remembered that when he saw it performed at the
Cockpit in 1660 ‘a very pretty lady that sat by me cried out to see
Desdemona smothered’.5 Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
audiences often wept openly during the performance; beginning in

   1
      On Othello’s capacity to overwhelm the audience’s (and even the actors’)
capacity for disbelief, see Pechter, pp. 11–14, 108; A. C. Sprague, Shakespeare and the
Actors (Cambridge, Mass., 1948), p. 199, and Elise Marks, ‘ “Othello/me”: Racial
Drag and the Pleasures of Boundary-Crossing with Othello’, Comparative Drama, 35
(2001), 101–23.
   2
      See Lois Potter, ‘Unhaply for I am white’, TLS, 5 Mar. 1999, 18–19, and Potter,
Othello (Manchester, 2002), pp. 135–9. A similar plot-device was employed in two
other ﬁlms, Carnival (1921)—a silent movie, remade as a talkie in 1931—Walter
Reisch’s Men are not Gods (1936). Another version of the fatal triangle appears in
Theatre at Large’s play Manawa Taua/Savage Hearts (Auckland, New Zealand, 1994)
in which a Maori chief, commanded by Queen Victoria to play Othello in a tour of
his home country, ﬁnds himself playing out an uncanny version of the story in real
life.
   3
      Christopher Fyfe, A History of Sierra Leone (Oxford, 1962), pp. 304–5; and
Potter, pp. 124, 134.
   4
      Cited in Hankey, p. 18; Jackson’s original note is in Latin.
   5
      Robert Latham and William Matthews (eds.), The Diary of Samuel Pepys, 11 vols.
(1970–83), i. 264 (11 Oct. 1660).

                                          9
                                   Introduction

1746, Spranger Barry’s electrifying Othello ‘invariably’ caused ‘the
females . . . to shriek’ in the murder scene;1 half a century later,
the ﬁerce pathos of Edmund Kean’s Moor was enough to make
even Byron cry, whilst ‘old men leaned their heads upon their arms
and fairly sobbed’ at the catastrophe.2 In revolutionary France
such was the effect of Joseph Talma’s 1792 performance that the
killing of Desdemona provoked ‘[t]ears, groans, and menaces . . .
from all parts of the theatre’, while ‘several of the prettiest women
in Paris fainted in the most conspicuous boxes and were publicly
carried out of the house’. So alarmed was Talma’s translator, Jean-
François Ducis, that he feared ‘for his tragedy, for his fame, and for
his life’, and felt bound to revise his version of the play, equipping
it for several performances with a happy ending.3 In 1829 accord-
ing to Alexandre Dumas père, Alfred de Vigny’s translation was
equally overwhelming in its impact on his Paris contemporaries,
who ‘shook [and] shuddered’ at Othello’s ‘roars of African jeal-
ousy’.4 In mid-nineteenth-century London, even the relatively
restrained oriental Moor of William Charles Macready produced so
‘thrilling’ an effect that when, after the murder, he thrust ‘his
dark, despairing face through the curtains of the bed’, a female
spectator is said to have ‘hysterically fainted’ at the sight.5 In
another of his performances, at the point when Macready seized
Iago by the throat in the temptation scene, a gentleman ‘started up
and exclaimed, loud enough for all around to hear, “Choke the
devil! Choke him!” ’6 The response of later nineteenth-century
audiences to such notable Othellos as Ira Aldridge and Tommaso
Salvini was often equally intense.

   1
     John Bernard, Retrospections of the Stage, 2 vols. (1830), i. 28; and cf. Virginia
Mason Vaughan, Othello: a contextual history (Cambridge, 1994), p. 120; Rosenberg,
pp. 45–6.
   2
     Rosenberg, p. 61; G. H. Lewes, On Actors and the Art of Acting (1875), p. 5, cited
in Hankey, p. 59.
   3
     See Rosenberg, p. 32.
   4
     Hankey, pp. 78–9.
   5
     Westland Marston and John Forster, cited in Hankey, pp. 64, 317.
   6
     Sprague, p. 199. For a modern production in which the audience shouted at
Othello in the murder scene, see Pechter’s discussion of Peter Zadek’s Othello at the
Deutsches Schauspielhaus, Hamburg, in 1976 (p. 56 and n. 5, pp. 203–4). The
action of Pier Paolo Pasolini’s ﬁlm Che Cosa Sono Le Nuovole (1967) is built around
the performance of a puppet-play Othello in which the audience not only call out
warnings to Othello in the eavesdropping scene (4.1), but ﬁnally invade the stage in
Act 5 to rescue Desdemona and kill both Iago and the Moor.

                                         10
                                    Introduction

   Twentieth-century playgoers generally proved rather less sug-
gestible: as early as 1905 we ﬁnd a reviewer complaining that
‘[t]here have been many successful Hamlets, but no Othello seems
to have satisﬁed critics in like degree’;1 and by 1948 Ruth Ellis
recorded that ‘[t]his tragedy, so overwhelming to read, has lately
proved one of the most difﬁcult to stage to complete satisfaction’.2
But some performances could still produce extraordinary reac-
tions: Laurence Olivier’s 1965 Moscow season is said to have
generated storms of emotion reminiscent of those that greeted
Aldridge a century earlier;3 and in 1979 (more predictably perhaps)
when the ﬁrst black actor to play Othello in the southern United
States kissed his Desdemona, it was enough to produce ‘audible
gasps’ from the audience and a string of hate letters.4 A decade
afterwards the reviewer John Peter confessed that the effect of
Trevor Nunn’s claustrophobic Stratford production was to make
him ‘want to reach out and stop Othello before it’s too late’.5
   Difﬁcult as it may appear to reconcile this history of emotional
surrender with the cool derision of the play’s detractors, the two
phenomena are related, for (as Bernard Shaw implicitly recog-
nized) Othello is a play whose designs on the audience can only suc-
ceed when there is a collapse of aesthetic distance. In its most
extreme form, illustrated by the soldier’s attack on the unfortunate
Baltimore Othello, this absolute suspension of disbelief can express
itself as an irrational compulsion to intervene in the action of the
play. But a more sophisticated version of the same response mani-
fests itself in the aggressive rhetorical challenges to Shakespeare’s
protagonist issued in a number of twentieth-century reworkings of
the play. So in Carlin’s postcolonial drama, where two actors—a
   1
     Stratford Herald, 12 May 1905; the critic repeated the same complaints verbatim
when reviewing another Benson performance on 9 August 1911, suggesting that
‘Othello is a tragedy of almost unattainable ideals, towards which the realities of
performance, as far as the chief character goes, and also perhaps Iago, must show
some disparity.’
   2
     Stratford Herald, 30 July 1948.
   3
     See Marks, pp. 103–5. The play’s unusual capacity to possess the imagination of
its audiences is clearly related, as Marks indicates, to the exceptional degree of self-
abandonment that the central role seems to elicit from the actors who play it—a
phenomenon acknowledged by Othellos from Macready to Paul Robeson and Ben
Kingsley (pp. 101–12).
   4
     See Suajata Iyengar, ‘White Faces, Blackface: The Production of Race in
Othello’, in Philip C. Kolin (ed.), Othello: New Critical Essays (New York, 2002),
p. 112.
   5
     Sunday Times, 27 Aug. 1989.

                                          11
                                  Introduction

white South African and a black West Indian—debate the signiﬁ-
cance of the tragedy for contemporary race politics, ‘Desdemona’
at one point attacks her fellow performer as though he were indeed
Shakespeare’s Moor:
You wouldn’t let go of the colour problem—not if they gave you a million
pounds and made you the King! Othello! The thicklips! As if you’d give
them up. The colour of your skin’s your most precious possession. That’s
your role.1

In Charles Marowitz’s agitprop drama An Othello (1974)—a rewrit-
ing of Shakespeare’s play in the context of the Black Power move-
ment—it is Iago (now cast as a black radical) who is made to
challenge Othello as the model of all blacks who, by capitulating to
the values of the white world, offer themselves as scapegoats
to racial bigotry:
Do you feel it, General—that crazy little shiver in the blood—a little like
speed—a little like cum—a warm, spikey, liquid glow lightin’ through all
the back-alleys of the body? That’s what a black man feels when he
scourges the whiteness in him. . . . Now the best half of your work’s done
and they’re nestlin’ in the wings—cosy in the stalls—waitin’ for their
high; the joy of seein’ the black man pay his dues, purge his soul, drive
three inches of steel into his regret and his remorse, so’s he makes his
ﬁnal bloody apology for risin’, mixin’, makin’ it and thinkin’ he could
carry it off despite all the odds. Look at ’em all, General, sittin’ cool and
quietly pantin’ for what they know’s already theirs—your rich-red,
routine-and-predictable blood. Pause brother . . . and reﬂect before you
feed those hyenas what four centuries of black generals have given them
without reﬂection . . . without one moment’s pause.2

Similarly in Caryl Phillips’s novel The Nature of Blood (1997),
the narrative voice harangues Othello as a sexual and political
sell-out:
And so you shadow her every move, attend to her every whim, like the
black Uncle Tom that you are. Fighting the white man’s war for him /
Wide-receiver in the Venetian army / The republic’s grinning Satchmo
hoisting his sword like a trumpet / You tuck your black skin away beneath
their epauletted uniform, appropriate their words (Rude am I in my


  1
    Carlin, pp. 42–3.
  2
    Charles Marowitz, An Othello, in Open Space Plays, selected by Charles Marowitz
(Harmondsworth, 1974), pp. 307–8.

                                        12
                                   Introduction

speech), their manners, worry your nappy woollen head with anxiety
about learning their ways. . . . O strong man, O strong arm, O valiant sol-
dier, O weak man. You are a lost, a sad black man, ﬁrst in a long line of so-
called achievers who are too weak to yoke their past with their present; too
naïve to insist on both; too foolish to realize that to supplant one with the
other can only lead to catastrophe. Go ahead, revel in the delights of her
wanton bed, but to whom will you turn when she, too, is lost and a real
storm breaks about your handkerchiefed head? My friend, the Yoruba have
a saying: the river that does not know its own source will dry up. You will
do well to remember this. . . . My friend, an African river bears no re-
semblance to a Venetian canal. Only the strongest spirit can hold both
together.1

   The political implications of Othello’s marriage to Desdemona
are once again at issue in Djanet Sears’s Harlem Duet (1998), which
displaces the action of the play to Harlem in 1860, 1928, and 1998.
The antebellum Othello’s subservient passion is denounced by his
black lover: ‘O? O? Othello . . . why you trying to please her? I’m so
tired of pleasing her. I’m so tired of pleasing White folks.’2
   The strident tone of these examples reﬂects the extent to which
racial controversy dominated late twentieth-century responses to
the play. From another point of view, however, they—like a num-
ber of other dramatic and novelistic reworkings3—merely give a

  1
     Caryl Phillips, The Nature of Blood (1997), pp. 181–3.
  2
     Djanet Sears, Harlem Duet, in Fischlin and Fortier (eds.), Adaptations of
Shakespeare, p. 302. For an analysis of the way in which Phillips and Sears ‘dis-
place . . . the action of Shakespeare’s play into broader con-texts’, see John Thieme,
Postcolonial Con-texts (2001).
  3
     Apart from the texts already cited, these include three other novels—Tayeb
Salih’s Season of Migration to the North (1969) as well as two by Salman Rushdie, The
Moor’s Last Sigh (1995) and Fury (2001)—and at least four other plays—C. Bernard
Jackson’s unpublished Iago (Los Angeles Inner City Cultural Center, 1974); Anne-
Marie Macdonald’s Goodnight Desdemona (Good Morning Juliet) (Toronto, 1990);
Caleen Jennings’s unpublished ‘Playing Juliet/Casting Othello’ (Washington The-
atre Festival, 1996; Folger Theatre, 1998); and David Geary’s and Willie Davis’s
unpublished Manawa Taua/Savage Hearts (Auckland, Watershed Theatre, 1994; see
above, p. 9, n. 2). Mythili Kaul’s critical collection, Othello: New Essays by Black
Writers (Washington, DC, 1997), includes a contribution by the African American
poet and novelist Al Young entitled ‘Hello, Othello’, which takes the form of an
imaginary interrogation of Shakespeare’s protagonist. For other postcolonial
reworkings and appropriations of the story, see Ferial Ghazoul, ‘The Arabization of
Othello’, Comparative Literature, 50 (1998), 1–31; Paromita Chakravarti, ‘Modernity,
Postcoloniality and Othello: the Case of Saptapadi’, and Poonam Trivedi, ‘Reading
“Other Shakespeares” ’, in Pascale Aebischer et al. (eds.), Remaking Shakespeare:
Performance Across Media, Genres, and Cultures (Basingstoke, 2003), 39–55, 56–73;

                                         13
                                    Introduction

contemporary political accent to a long-established way of dealing
with the imaginative challenge of this tragedy: for it is a testimony
to the peculiar power of Othello that, of all the dramatist’s works, it
has been the most extensively interrogated, appropriated, and
rewritten in other ﬁctions. The habit of rewriting began early in the
seventeenth century with the character of ‘honest’ De Flores in
Thomas Middleton’s and William Rowley’s The Changeling (c.1622),
a treacherous servant transparently indebted to Iago, and con-
tinued with John Ford’s Love’s Sacriﬁce (1632)—a drama that
transforms the original plot by imagining a guilty Desdemona who
bears the name of Shakespeare’s courtesan, Bianca. Further imita-
tions followed after the Restoration in the form of Thomas Porter’s
The Villain (1662), and Henry Nevil Payne’s The Fatal Jealousie
(1673);1 and in the eighteenth century the play won the attention
of European dramatists, producing German and French adapta-
tions by Schröder (1776) and Ducis (1792), which gave the play a
happy ending,2 as well as Voltaire’s tragedy Zaïre (1732), in which
the French philosophe attempted a neoclassical refurbishment of
Shakespeare’s ‘barbarous’ work.
   What most attracted these imitators and adaptors seems not to
have been the dramatist’s strikingly unconventional choice of tra-
gic protagonist, so much as his pathos-laden treatment of jealousy
and temptation, Desdemona’s martyred goodness, and the splen-
did dignity of Othello. The persistence of the ‘noble Moor’ sobri-
quet indicates the extent to which Othello’s heroic self-image
tended to dominate responses to the play, helping to explain
(among other things) its extraordinary popularity amongst mili-
tary ofﬁcers in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.3 The

Ania Loomba, ‘Local-manufacture made-in-India Othello fellows: Issues of race,
hybridity, and location in post-colonial Shakespeares’, in Ania Loomba and Martin
Orkin (eds.), Postcolonial Shakespeares (1998), 143–63; and Jyotsna Singh, ‘Othello’s
Identity, Postcolonial Theory and Contemporary African Rewritings of Othello’, in
Lena Cowen Orlin (ed.), Othello: Contemporary Critical Essays (Basingstoke, 2004),
171–89.
   1
      On these plays, see Vaughan, pp. 101–2, 107–12.
   2
      Rosenberg, pp. 31–3, and Hankey, pp. 75–7.
   3
      See Brian Southam, Jane Austen and the Navy (2000), p. 265 n. 93. According to
Southam, ‘articles and reports in the Navy’s professional journal, the Naval Chron-
icle, are larded with quotations from . . . Othello’; and ofﬁcers of the Gibraltar garri-
son (perhaps capitalizing on its garrison setting, and story of Mediterranean naval
triumph) staged a production of the play shortly before the battle of Trafalgar in
1805. Othello’s popularity in military circles extended to the United States, where

                                          14
                                  Introduction

imaginative power of the tragedy’s romantic aspects continued to
inﬂuence nineteenth-century stage versions, its emotive potential
being exploited to particular effect in the operas by Gioachino
Rossini (1816) and Giuseppe Verdi (1887), as well as in Salvatore
Viganò’s 1818 ballet, all of which played down the issue of racial
mésalliance in order to concentrate on the pathos of jealous obses-
sion and love destroyed.1
   As early as 1688, however, an alternative direction had been
suggested by Aphra Behn’s novel Oroonoko, subsequently drama-
tized by Thomas Southerne. Loosely inﬂuenced by Shakespeare’s
tragedy, and written as English participation in the slave trade
moved towards its peak, Behn’s ﬁction capitalized on Othello’s
racial dimension by inventing a new history for the princely
African hero, whose enslavement now belonged not to the Mediter-
ranean conﬂict with Islam, but to the horrors of the Atlantic tri-
angle. Three decades later, Edward Young’s The Revenge (1721),
perhaps inﬂuenced by Rymer’s strictures on Shakespeare’s viola-
tions of decorum, would reverse the colour values of the original,
by creating a black Iago in the swagger-part of Zanga, and making
the victim of his temptation a white man.2 In Behn’s and Young’s
reworkings, as in Rymer’s invective, we can see the beginnings of
the process by which Othello’s colour would come to be identiﬁed
as the key to his tragedy; and by the beginning of the next century,
the racial assumptions implicit in Young’s transformation of the
villain would reach their nadir in the succession of ‘burlesques’
and ‘travesties’ that brought Rymer’s sneers at the ‘blackamoor’
general to vicious theatrical life. From this point on, although Oth-
ello would continue to be discussed primarily as a drama of sexual
jealousy, its theatrical and critical history would be increasingly

one of the more extraordinary records is of a production in 1846 at Corpus
Christi, Texas, by troops engaged in the Mexican war, starring the young Lieutenant
Ulysses S. Grant as Desdemona.
   1
     For a useful summary of the plot adaptations in the two operas, see Sanders’s
introduction to his Cambridge edition, pp. 49–51. The overwhelmingly domestic
focus of Verdi’s librettist, Arrigo Boito, is indicated by his excision of Act 1’s
Venetian scenes. Twentieth-century adaptations have included a third opera (A.
Machavariani, 1963). In contrast to the operatic versions, the 1974 rock musical,
Catch My Soul! (subsequently ﬁlmed by Patrick McGoohan) starring the soul singer
Richie Havens as Othello, placed strong emphasis on the story’s racial themes.
   2
     See Hankey, pp. 57, 75, 78. The great Ira Aldridge—the ﬁrst black actor to play
Othello—did so in repertory with the part of Zanga, implying a complementarity
between the two roles.

                                        15
                            Introduction

inﬂected by racial ideas—ideas to which pseudo-Darwinian theo-
ries in due course gave spurious intellectual support.
   Until the last quarter of the twentieth century, understanding
of the part played by colour in the play was fraught with contra-
diction. In so far as it appeared problematic, it was as an accident
of plot—something whose import needed to be minimized or
explained away, just as in performance it was frequently dimin-
ished by the transformation of ‘black Othello’ into a light-skinned
North African. At the same time it was generally assumed that
‘race’ and ‘colour’ were in themselves unproblematic categories
whose signiﬁcance remained constant through time. The advent of
so-called ‘new historicist’ criticism in the 1980s challenged such
anachronistic assumptions, by demonstrating the unstable nature
of the categories that deﬁned human difference in Shakespeare’s
time—a period that had yet to evolve anything like a coherent lan-
guage of ‘race’. Nevertheless, as critics have also been aware, it is
impossible to read texts from the past in absolute isolation from
intervening history, including the history of their own reception.
In the case of Othello, the play as we read it today is inevitably
marked by its long implication in the development of racial
thought; and later sections of this introduction will examine the
ways in which the critical and performance histories reﬂect chang-
ing responses to the tragedy’s racial dimension. It is important to
recognize that Shakespeare’s role in this historical process has not
been a purely passive matter: for good as well as ill, the play’s
involvement in the white world’s construction of ‘blackness’ has
been to some extent a formative one; and it has been so because of
the dramatist’s own deep imaginative engagement with the mean-
ing of ‘colour’. We can track this engagement through the striking
way in which Shakespeare reshaped his principal source material,
giving to the hero’s blackness a prominence and signiﬁcance it had
not had in the original.


Sources
Before discussing Shakespeare’s adaptation of his ‘sources’, some
deﬁnitions need to be established, since the term can be a danger-
ously elastic one: some modern editors, concerned to stress the
importance of broader cultural contexts in the shaping of literary
works, have sought to collapse the old distinction between
                                 16
                                  Introduction

‘sources’ and ‘inﬂuences’, arguing that the latter can sometimes be
just as important in determining the ﬁnal shape of a work as the
texts of which the writer can be shown to have made direct use. It
is quite possible, for example, to think of Othello as a reworking of
Christopher Marlowe’s tragedy of damnation, Dr Faustus (c.1589).
Just before his death, confronted with the stupefying evidence of
Iago’s treachery, Othello craves an explanation for his ensign’s
inexplicable malice: ‘Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil |
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?’ (5.2.299–300). It
is the moment at which, more explicitly than any other, we are
made aware of the model upon which the fearful intimacy between
the protagonist and his tempter has been based—the damnable
symbiosis through which a literally demonic servant contrives to
deliver his master ‘body and soul’ into Lucifer’s possession: ‘O what
will I not do’, gloats Mephostophilis, as Faustus indites the fatal
deed of gift, ‘to obtain his soul?’ (2.1.73).1 Throughout Shake-
speare’s tragedy ‘honest’ Iago seems to be at the Moor’s side, pour-
ing insinuations in his ear, just as ‘sweet’ Mephostophilis shadows
the Wittenberg magician, conﬁding his diabolical persuasions: so
close is their bond that some critics have seen them as aspects of a
single personality, locked in a combat that, like Faustus’s, replays
the psychomachia of the medieval Morality drama, in which the bat-
tle for possession of man’s soul was fought out by allegorical repre-
sentations of vice and virtue.2 Marlowe’s inﬂuence on Othello
seems obvious enough; yet Dr Faustus is not in any exact sense a
‘source’ for the later tragedy: Shakespeare had a remarkably
absorptive intelligence; and in Othello (as elsewhere) it is possible to
trace numerous literary and dramatic inﬂuences: these include
popular travel literature, Italian romance,3 and a whole range of
plays—notably a group of turn-of-the-century domestic dramas
featuring the suffering of abused wives, as well more exotic

  1
     Cited from Christopher Marlowe, Dr Faustus and Other Plays, ed. David Beving-
ton and Eric Rasmussen (Oxford, 1995). For parallels with a number of other
double-protagonist plays by Ben Jonson, see Potter, p. 7.
  2
     This in fact was how the actor Ben Kingsley, who played Othello in Terry
Hands’s 1985–6 production for the RSC, approached his relationship with Iago:
‘Othello and Iago are almost two faces of the same man’, he declared. ‘They are both
suffering from the same psychological disturbance’ (Observer Colour Magazine, 22
Sept. 1985).
  3
     On the possible inﬂuence of the epic romances of Ariosto and Tasso, see Honig-
mann, pp. 245, 368, and Potter, p. 9.

                                        17
                                Introduction

tragedies such as Peele’s Battle of Alcazar (c.1588–9), the anony-
mous Lust’s Dominion (1598–9), and Shakespeare’s own Titus
Andronicus (c.1589–94) to whose conventionally villainous Moor-
ish characters Othello and Iago provide a kind of riposte.
   The problem with such an approach is that the number of
‘sources’ credited to a particular play becomes limited only by what
we can conjecture about the extent of the author’s reading and
theatrical experience; and because it is in principle almost impos-
sible to set manageable boundaries to inﬂuence of this kind, I
have thought it better to conﬁne the term ‘sources’ to material that
Shakespeare appears certain—or at least likely—to have consulted
in the course of writing the play.

Setting, Characters, and Plot Scholars have uncovered extensive
traces of Shakespeare’s contextual reading in Othello, especially in
the play’s historical and geographical detail. For information about
the political and social organization of the Venetian republic, he
evidently turned to Sir Lewis Lewkenor’s translation of Cardinal
Contarini’s The Commonwealth and Government of Venice (1599);1
while (as indicated in my discussion of the play’s date in Appendix
A) he may have derived information about the Venetian struggle to
defend Cyprus against the Turks from Richard Knolles’s Generall
Historie of the Turkes (1603), as well as from James I’s Lepanto
(c.1585), a poem celebrating the Christian naval victory that tem-
porarily saved Cyprus from the Turks in 1571.
   As we shall see, the choice of a Moorish hero was determined by
the novella on which his plot was based; but the source makes no
real effort to explore the nature or signiﬁcance of the character’s
difference. Shakespeare, by contrast, sought to ﬂesh it out with
ethnographical material garnered principally from Leo Africanus’
encyclopedic Geographical Historie of Africa—presumably in the
translation by John Pory (1600).2 Not only did Leo stress the ‘ven-
ery’ of African peoples and their propensity for jealousy; but his
own biography, as a North African who was captured by Venetian
pirates and enslaved before converting to Christianity and acquir-

  1
    See Muir, pp. 187–8, and Commentary, 1.1.181, 1.2.43, 3.3.178, 5.2.338.
  2
    For details of possible borrowings, see Lois Whitney, ‘Did Shakespeare know
Leo Africanus?’, PMLA 37 (1922), 470–88, and Geoffrey Bullough, Narrative and
Dramatic Sources of Shakespeare, 8 vols. (1957–75), vii. 208–11.

                                      18
                                Introduction

ing the patronage of Pope Leo X, has been proposed as a likely
model for Othello’s ‘travailous’s history’ (1.3.129–45). In the intro-
duction to his translation, Pory writes of Leo’s ‘exceeding great
travels’ in terms that seem to anticipate the exotic wonders of Oth-
ello’s great speech to the Venetian Senate:
had he not at the ﬁrst been a Moor and a Mahometan in religion. . . . I
marvel much how ever he should have escaped so many thousands of
imminent dangers. . . . For how many desolate cold mountains, and huge,
dry and barren deserts passed he? How often was he in hazard to have been
captived, or to have had his throat cut by the prowling Arabians and wild
Moors. And how hardly many times escaped he the lion’s greedy mouth,
and the devouring jaws of the crocodile. . . . But not to forget his conver-
sion to Christianity, midst all these his busy and dangerous travels: it
pleased the divine providence. . . . to deliver this author of ours . . . into
the hands of certain Italian pirates. . . . Being thus taken the pirates pre-
sented him and his book unto Pope Leo the tenth, who, esteeming of him
as of a most rich and valuable prize, greatly rejoiced at his arrival, and
gave him most kind entertainment and liberal maintenance, till such time
as he had won him to be baptized. (Book 1, p. 6)1

Leo himself exhibits a moving self-consciousness about his conﬂict-
ed identity as a Christianized Moor, whose life resembled that of the
strange ﬁsh-birds he calls Amphibia (1.41–3); and it was perhaps
this that prompted Shakespeare to ponder the destructive double
allegiance expressed in Othello’s suicide, where he is at once the
‘malignant’ inﬁdel, the ‘circumcisèd dog’ who ‘beat a Venetian and
traduced the state’, and the heroic Christian avenger of that
outrage (5.2.351–5).
   In addition to what he may have gleaned from Leo, Shake-
speare’s knowledge of Africa was coloured with exotic details
culled from one of the oldest of all geographies, Pliny’s Natural His-
tory, translated by Philemon Holland in 1601: Othello’s response to
the accusation that he has used magic charms on Desdemona is
closely modelled on the protestation of a deﬁant former bondslave
in Pliny; and Othello’s famous Pontic Sea trope, like his lyrical
description of Arabian trees that weep ‘medicinable gum’, derives
from the same source.2 Pliny was also the ﬁrst to describe the

  1
    See also Commentary, 1.3.140, 340–1, 349; App. F(iv).
  2
    See App. F(ii); Commentary, 1.3.169, 5.2.349–90. For other apparent debts to
Pliny, see also 2.1.153, 3.3.331, 5.2.101–3, 143.

                                      19
                                Introduction

monstrous people known as Blemmyae or Acephali, the ‘men whose
heads do grow beneath their shoulders’ who feature in Othello’s
traveller’s tales, along with the ‘Anthropophagi’ whom Pliny had
located in Ethiopia (1.3.144–5). While he seems to have known
Pliny at ﬁrst hand, Shakespeare is likely also to have been acquaint-
ed with the Travels of Sir John Mandeville, a much reprinted
ﬁfteenth-century fantasy, in which numerous Plinian monsters
appear, including eaters of human ﬂesh and men whose eyes and
mouths are in their shoulders. But Othello’s reference to ‘Canni-
bals’ (l. 143) suggests that he had more recent travels in mind, since
‘Cannibal’ (a derivative of Carib) was used to designate particular
peoples of the New World. Sir Walter Ralegh’s Discoverie of Guiana
(1595) contains an extended description of the headless
‘Ewaipanoma’—a people with ‘eyes in their shoulders, and their
mouths in the middle of their breasts, and . . . a long train of hair
. . . backward between their shoulders’ (p. 178), of whom he
claimed to have heard reports along the Orinoco, and whose exist-
ence seemed to prove the truth of Mandeville’s ‘incredible’ fables.1
Among other tribes in the region, Ralegh encountered ‘a great
nation of Canibals’;2 and the appearance of the legend ‘Canibales’
close to an illustration of an acephelous warrior in Theodor de
Bry’s map for his 1599 edition of the Discoverie in America pars VIII
suggests that the dramatist may even have seen de Bry’s compen-
dium (ﬁg. 2).
    Whilst his main plot closely follows Giraldi Cinthio’s novella,
Shakespeare’s handling of the murder scene seems to have been
inﬂuenced by a story from Geoffrey Fenton’s Certaine Tragicall Dis-
courses (1567), a translation (via Belleforest’s expanded French ver-
sion) of a collection of Italian novelle by Bandello. Discourse 4 tells
the story of an insanely jealous captain who murders his loving
and obedient wife in order that no one shall enjoy her after his
death. Although Don Spado is an Albanian rather than an African,
he is credited with a ‘rage and unnatural ﬁre, far exceeding the sav-
age and brutish manner of the tiger, lion, or leopard, bred in the
deserts of Africa, the common nurse of monsters and creatures cruel


  1
    Sir Walter Ralegh, The Discoverie of the Large, Rich and Bewtiful Empyre of
Guiana, ed. Neil L. Whitehead (Manchester, 1997), p. 178.
  2
    Ralegh, p. 179.

                                      20
                                   Introduction




         2. ‘The cannibals that each other eat . . . and men whose
      heads | Do grow beneath their shoulders’, from Theodor de Bry,
                        America pars VIII (1599).



without reason’.1 Like Othello, Don Spado murders his wife in bed,
and kisses her (‘in such sort as Judas kissed our Lord’) before he
kills her; and like Othello too he stabs himself and falls dead on his
wife’s body. Like Desdemona she in turn revives long enough to
‘pardon . . . her husband with all her heart’.2 Daniel Vitkus has
also noted some parallels with the widely disseminated story of the
Sultan and the Fair Greek, in which an Ottoman tyrant, in order to
prove his manly resistance to intemperate desire, murders the
Christian captive with whom he has become infatuated.3
   So far as the main outline of the plot and many of its details are
concerned, however, only one signiﬁcant source has been dis-
covered: Othello is closely based on Story 7 in the Third Decade of
Giovanni Battista Giraldi Cinthio’s Gli Hecatommithi (see Appendix

  1
    Bullough, p. 260; emphases, unless otherwise indicated, are my own.
  2
    Bullough, pp. 261–2.
  3
    Daniel Vitkus, Turning Turk: English Theater and the Multicultural Mediterranean,
1570–1630 (Basingstoke, 2003), p. 99.

                                         21
                                 Introduction

C), which Shakespeare almost certainly read in the original.
Although Giraldi’s compilation of novelle was ﬁrst published in
1565, no English translation is known to have existed before the
mid-eighteenth century; and while a French translation by Gabriel
Chappuys appeared in 1584, verbal parallels overwhelmingly fa-
vour the Italian version.1 Giraldi’s collection is framed as the prod-
uct of a conversation between a group of travellers who seek to
alleviate the tedium of a sea-voyage by debating a series of ama-
tory topics, each of which they illustrate with appropriate tales.
In the opening conversation, Fabio, the leader of the group,
announces a thesis which becomes an overriding theme of the
ensuing tales—namely ‘that peace can be found only in the love
that comes of counsel and chooses well. For in such a love appetite
is ruled by reason.’2 The Third Decade illustrates the perils of
unreasonable love and unbridled appetite with stories of ‘[t]he in-
ﬁdelity of husbands and wives’, among them Story 7, which
recounts the fatal jealousy of a Moorish captain, who, whilst on
garrison duty in Cyprus falls prey to the envious machinations of
his alﬁeri (ensign).3 This ofﬁcer, though ‘handsome’ and ‘much
loved by the Moor’, is described as harbouring ‘the most wicked dis-
position’, which, however, he so conceals with his ‘lofty and proud
words and manner . . . that he appear[s] to resemble a Hector or an
Achilles’. By exploiting his plausible appearance, he is able to con-
vince the Moor that his Venetian wife is conducting an adulterous
affair with one of his subordinates, a capo di squadra (corporal).
   The novella supplied Shakespeare not only with all the salient
features of his plot, but with much of its incidental detail: the vir-
tuous Disdemona (as Giraldi calls her) insists on sharing the perils
of her husband’s life by accompanying him to Cyprus; Disdemona
treats the subordinate ofﬁcer with particular kindness because she
knows he is ‘very dear to the Moor’, and the alﬁeri exploits their
friendship to plant suspicion in the Moor; the villain makes his
insinuations more persuasive by feigning reluctance to speak,
insisting that only his ‘loving service’, his profound sense of duty,
and his care for the Moor’s honour compel him to reveal the truth.

 1
   See Bullough, p. 194; Muir, pp. 182–3; Honigmann, pp. 368–9; and cf. Com-
mentary 1.3.342, 2.1.16, and 3.3.361–5.
 2
   Bullough, p. 239.
 3
   Citations from this tale are to Bruno Ferraro’s translation: Appendix C, below.

                                       22
                                Introduction

Like Iago, he manipulates the Moor’s racial unease by suggesting
that ‘[t]he woman has come to dislike your blackness’. The Moor
for his part demands some visible proof of the adultery, which (as
in the play) is supplied partly in the form of a purloined handker-
chief, and partly through a carefully staged conversation between
the alﬁeri and the supposed adulterer, which the Moor is allowed to
witness and persuaded to misinterpret. Disdemona, like Shake-
speare’s heroine, expresses her anxieties about her husband’s
altered demeanour, ﬁrst to the Moor himself, and then to her conﬁ-
dante, the villain’s wife. The Moor meanwhile conspires with his
subordinate to kill both Disdemona and her alleged lover. The latter
is ambushed by the villain, who (as in the play) only succeeds in
leaving him severely wounded in the leg. Then, after a discussion
between the conspirators on the best method of dispatching her,
Disdemona is murdered in her bedchamber. The wronged wife dies,
begging heaven to witness her innocence; and the Moor, realizing
too late the villainy of the alﬁeri, is distracted with grief. In Giraldi,
however, the Moor’s remorse does not drive him to suicide:
instead, he is arrested, tortured, and (when he refuses to confess)
condemned to perpetual exile, after which he is hunted down
and killed by his wife’s relatives. His subordinate is subsequently
arrested on a different charge and tortured so severely that he later
dies of his injuries.
   Observing the extensive parallels between the two versions of the
story, one senses that Shakespeare must have been drawn to Giral-
di’s story partly because of its wealth of circumstantial material.
Readers will be struck by how many of the play’s scenes derive their
theatrical liveliness from the elaboration of some unusually vivid
detail in the source. Just as important, perhaps, was the uncharac-
teristically matter-of-fact style of the novella—the accumulation of
realistic and sometimes pedestrian details which suggest that its ori-
gins may lie in some sixteenth-century police report.1 Not surpris-
ingly, much of this detail tends to cluster around the devious
machinations of the villain on which the plot depends: for example,
the almost pedantic care with which the narrative speciﬁes the
number of blows with a sand-ﬁlled stocking needed to break Disde-
mona’s skull, or the meticulous fashion in which it explains just
how it was that the villain, having ‘with very deft . . . ﬁngers’ stolen

                          1
                              See Bullough, p. 195.

                                     23
                                  Introduction

the handkerchief from Disdemona’s girdle, was able to use it to
incriminate her. The ﬂat documentary quality of Giraldi’s narrative
might seem to be at odds with a play whose distinctive ‘music’ makes
it the most lyrical—the most operatic even—of the mature tragedies
;1 but it seems to have contributed signiﬁcantly to the reductivism of
Iago, a character so resistant to the play’s music that he can hear
only ‘bombast’ in the swell of Othello’s oratory, whilst his own verse
is often barely distinguishable from the informal prose that marks
his bluff exchanges with Cassio and Roderigo. It is precisely the pro-
saic realism of Iago’s stories, his instinctive eye for commonplace
detail, that makes them so persuasive: consider, for example, the
way in which his concocted account of Cassio’s amorous sleep-
talking, is carefully anchored in the banal circumstance of his own
sleeplessness (‘being troubled with a raging tooth’) and the scrupu-
lously catalogued physical embarrassments that ensue: ‘And then,
sir, would he gripe and wring my hand . . . then kiss me hard . . .
then laid his leg | Over my thigh, and sighed, and kissed’ (3.3.416,
422–6); or observe how brilliantly Iago reinforces the adulterous
suggestiveness of the stolen handkerchief with a piece of seemingly
offhand observation: ‘such a handkerchief . . . did I today | See Cas-
sio wipe his beard with’ (3.3.438–40). Othello’s desperate longing
for ‘ocular proof’, his repeated insistence that Iago ‘Make me to see’
what he most dreads seeing (3.3.362, 366) is at once stimulated and
fed by autoptic detail of this kind, dependent as it is (or appears to be)
on the kind of dogged scrutiny that the ensign urges on the Moor
himself:
                              Do but encave yourself,
             And mark the ﬂeers, the gibes, and notable scorns
             That dwell in every region of his face.
             For I will make him tell the tale anew:
             Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
             He hath, and is again to cope your wife.
             I say, but mark his gesture . . .
                                                     (4.1.77–83)

   If Iago were given his reductive way, Othello would be no differ-
ent from Giraldi’s squalid tale of jealousy and wife-murder. Indeed,
for Thomas Rymer it was not, since the moral he extracted from the
 1
   On this aspect of the play, see G. Wilson Knight’s celebrated essay, ‘The Othello
Music’, chap. 5 of The Wheel of Fire (1930; repr. 1954).

                                        24
                                  Introduction

play (‘This may be a caution to all maidens of quality how, without
their parents’ consent, they run away with blackamoors’; p. 89)
was precisely that announced by Giraldi’s Disdemona (‘I shall be
held up as an example to young girls who wish to marry against
their family’s wishes, and to Italian girls so that they may learn not
to choose a man whom nature, God, and manner of life make so
different from us’). This passage is echoed by Iago himself when he
persuades Othello that to ignore ‘clime, complexion, and degree’ is
to marry against ‘nature’ (3.3.233–7). Shakespeare, however—
while retaining not only the broad outline of the narrative, but a
surprising amount of incidental detail from Giraldi—reworked it in
ways that gave the story a completely different colouring. Some
of the changes he made, especially those involving the characters,
are substantial; others, particularly those affecting the plot,
may appear relatively insigniﬁcant; but their combined effect is
momentous.
   To begin with, nearly all the ﬁrst act is of Shakespeare’s inven-
tion. Here he not only lays an entirely new groundwork for the
Ensign’s scheming against his commander, but by greatly elabo-
rating a couple of small hints in Giraldi, turns Othello’s elopement
into a matter of public import. In Gli Hecatommithi Disdemona’s
family are simply said to have ‘tried all they could to make her wed
somebody else’; in Othello her enraged father is a powerful senator
who seeks to have the Moor arraigned for seducing his daughter
with forbidden arts, and whose suit appears to fail mainly because
a military crisis takes priority with the Venetian state.1 Shake-
speare digniﬁes the story by translating its main action from Giral-
di’s apparently peaceful island to a Cyprus that has become the
strategic focus of Christian–Islamic conﬂict in the Mediterranean.
The Moor himself is no longer the mere ‘Commandant’ of a relief
detachment (Capitano de’ soldati) but general of the Venetian
forces, and military governor of the island.
   Whilst the public dimension of the play becomes less conspicu-
ous once the providential destruction of the Turkish ﬂeet has
removed any immediate threat to the island, the framework of

   1
     Technically, Brabantio’s case collapses when Desdemona answers his chal-
lenge by admitting that she was indeed ‘half the wooer’ (1.3.175–97); but the
Duke’s speech at ll. 171–4 makes it clear that he has already decided to acquit the
man he means to employ ‘Against the general enemy Ottoman’ (l. 50).

                                        25
                                   Introduction

momentous public events lends gravity to what might otherwise
seem a mere domestic tragedy, little different from bourgeois dra-
mas like Heywood’s A Woman Killed with Kindness (1603) with
which it has sometimes been associated.1 Giraldi’s Moor is never
seen in the public role that helps to shape the audience’s view of
Othello in the ﬁrst two acts. He is described as ‘a very valiant Moor’
who was dear to the Venetian lords ‘because he was very brave
and had given proof of his courage and prudence in warfare’. But
Giraldi makes no effort to substantiate this bald assertion; and his
Moor is a long way from Shakespeare’s supremely self-possessed
commander, whose conﬁdence rests equally upon pride in his il-
lustrious ancestry and awareness of the unmatched service he has
done the state (1.2.18–24). In his re-invention of Giraldi’s anony-
mous and thinly described Moor not only as a Christianized black
African, but as a princely warrior who boasts of fetching his ‘life
and being | From men of royal siege’ (1.2.21–2), Shakespeare may
have been inﬂuenced by two well-established iconographical tradi-
tions—one that habitually represented Balthasar, one of the three
Magi in the Nativity story, as a splendidly attired black king,2 and
another that represented the soldier–martyr, St Maurice, as a
Negro clad in rich European armour (see ﬁg. 3).3 Since medieval
times, Europeans had been excited by rumours of a black Christian
monarch named Prester John, who might prove a valuable ally in
the struggle against Islam; and Lois Potter has suggested that
Shakespeare could also have known about the Kongo kingdom,
‘ruled for over a hundred years by Christian kings who could
have been the “men of royal siege” from whom Othello claims
descent’.4


  1
     See Honigmann, p. 349.
  2
     See G. K. Hunter, ‘Othello and Colour Prejudice’, Proceedings of the British Acad-
emy, 53 (1967), 139–63 (pp. 154–5). From the ninth century onwards the Magi were
customarily interpreted as representing the three continents of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, though traditions varied as to whether Balthasar or Melchior should be iden-
tiﬁed as the black king.
   3
     There appears to be no historical foundation for the representation of St Mau-
rice as a black man, beyond his name, which derives from the Latin Mauros = a
Moor, or a swarthy, dark-complexioned man (see also Commentary, 2.1.221,
5.2.224). On the iconographic tradition, see Jean Devisse, The Image of the Black in
Western Art, 3 vols. (1997–2005), II.i; Part III, ‘The Sanctiﬁed Black: Maurice’,
149–205.
   4
     See Potter, p. 9.

                                         26
                                   Introduction




        3. The noble Moor: reliquary statue of St Maurice, 1525–7.


   In Giraldi, we are left uncertain as to what kind of Moor his pro-
tagonist is supposed to be; indeed, for most of the novella his eth-
nicity appears to be of relatively minor signiﬁcance. Although
Disdemona accuses the Moor of being hot and jealous by nature,
while the Ensign at one point suggests that she has come to hate
her husband for his colour, these imputations appear to have no
particular effect on the Moor himself.1 Shakespeare, however,
seizes on such small hints as a key to the insecurities that Iago is
able to arouse and then exploit (3.3.231–42). Othello, moreover,


   1
     This is in line with Giraldi’s general lack of interest in the psychology of his
tale: he registers, for example, the paradox of the Moor’s jealous longing ‘to get
more proof of that which he did not wish to discover’, but it is left to Shakespeare
to explore the psychological consequences of this painful contradiction.

                                        27
                               Introduction

proves vulnerable to Iago’s insinuations that there is something
‘unnatural’ about his match, not merely because of his alien iden-
tity (of which blackness is the most conspicuous sign), but also
because the dramatist has made him signiﬁcantly older than his
wife, so that Othello comes to fear that—as in so many of the
jealousy-plots of Renaissance comedy—his may be a misalliance
of age as well as kind (3.3.266–9).
   Other important characters, such as Desdemona, Iago, Emilia,
Bianca, and Cassio are similarly worked up from their underdevel-
oped prototypes in the novella, while still others, such as Roderigo
and Brabantio, are entirely of Shakespeare’s creation. In Giraldi
Disdemona is a somewhat colourless ﬁgure, a pattern of wifely
devotion and patience, whose role is partly glossed by the ‘unfortu-
nate name that she had been given by her father’ (Disdemona =
‘The Unfortunate’ in Greek), and who remains a model of courtesy
and humility in the face of the gravest provocation; but Shake-
speare endows his heroine with a vocal independence of spirit that
makes her ultimate submissiveness in the face of Othello’s murder-
ous jealousy seem at once more moving and more shocking than
her counterpart’s routine goodness. He provides an occasion for
her to demonstrate her mettle through the addition of a despotic
father-ﬁgure, Brabantio, whose previous patronage of Othello has
given way to bitter hatred at the news of his daughter’s elopement.
Desdemona’s deﬁance of her father before the Senate looks forward
to Cordelia’s resolute refusal to co-operate in Lear’s public spec-
tacle of ﬁlial devotion. But where Cordelia’s resistance may initial-
ly seem like mere obstinacy, Desdemona’s is so framed as to make it
appear both courageous and admirable; for, as Susan Snyder has
shown,1 the ﬁrst act of Othello draws heavily on the conventions of
romantic comedy, in which patriarchal tyrants ﬁgure prominently
amongst the obstacles to erotic fulﬁlment that lovers are expected
to overcome.
   If Brabantio is a ﬁgure whose antecedents can be traced back
through Italian commedia dell’arte to Roman New Comedy, the
same is true of Roderigo, the gullible and ineffectual rival who
serves as Othello’s foil, as well as a necessary interlocutor and dupe
for Iago, enabling him to display his vicious intentions to the audi-


                    1
                        Snyder, Comic Matrix, pp. 70–4.

                                     28
                                 Introduction

ence without constant recourse to soliloquy and aside.1 In a similar
fashion, Shakespeare makes use of the plain-spoken waiting-
woman or nurse from the comic tradition to work up the character
of Emilia from her anonymous counterpart in Giraldi. Thus, where
the Ensign’s wife is simply a close friend whom Disdemona often
visits, in Shakespeare she becomes Desdemona’s intimate conﬁ-
dante—albeit one whose servant-role establishes a suggestive par-
allel between this relationship and that which ties her husband to
Othello. In Giraldi she plays no part in the theft of the handkerchief
(though Iago purloins it during one of Disdemona’s visits to her),
but she is made privy to all her husband’s schemes, which she
dares not disclose to Disdemona, conﬁning herself to the warning
that her friend should give the Moor no occasion for suspicion and
do everything to reassure him of her love and loyalty. Emilia, by
contrast, remains ignorant and largely unsuspecting of Iago’s
wickedness until after the murder, concealing from Desdemona
only her complicity in the theft of the handkerchief. Emilia’s
refusal to doubt her husband, in spite of his offhand treatment,
helps (along with Cassio’s trusting attitude, and Roderigo’s com-
plaisance) to make Othello’s belief in Iago’s ‘honesty’ seem less
improbable than it otherwise might. But perhaps her most impor-
tant function is to act as a kind of second self for Desdemona, pro-
viding a voice for that sturdy resistance to patriarchal tyranny that
she exhibited in the confrontation with Brabantio, but which her
love for her husband forces her to suppress.
   The interest in gender issues highlighted by Emilia’s powerful
denunciation of abusive husbands (4.3.81–98) is further developed
through the character of Bianca, who is an amalgam of two
women mentioned in Giraldi—the servant whom the capo orders to
copy the Moorish embroidery on Disdemona’s handkerchief, and
the courtesan whose house he has been visiting on the night of the
Ensign’s ambush. But although her part remains a minor one,
Shakespeare gives Bianca a structural function well beyond her
importance in the plot: she is linked with the ‘fair’ Desdemona both
by her name (which means ‘white’) and by the accusations of
whoredom which are levelled at her by Iago (5.1.115), just as they
are levelled at Desdemona by Othello in the so-called ‘brothel

1
  See Bernard Spivack, Shakespeare and the Allegory of Evil (New York, 1958), pp.
441–2.

                                       29
                                   Introduction

scene’ (4.2). At the same time, her jealousy of Cassio’s supposed
inﬁdelity establishes an unexpected kinship with ‘black’ Othello;
while her seemingly guileless love for the offhand Cassio mirrors
both Desdemona’s self-sacriﬁcial adoration of Othello, and Emilia’s
stubborn loyalty to her misogynistic husband.
   But as far as the characters are concerned, perhaps the most sig-
niﬁcant transformation of the source material (leaving aside the
psychological development of the Moor himself) occurs in the
handling of Cassio and Iago; and a key component in this change
involves the question of rank. In both versions of the story, the vil-
lain is an ensign. ‘Ancient’ is Shakespeare’s preferred spelling of
the word, but that the two forms must have been pronounced
more-or-less identically is indicated by Iago’s wry punning: ‘I must
show out a ﬂag and sign of love— | Which is indeed but sign’
(1.1.155–6; italics added). As his standard-bearer, an ensign was in
fact the public ‘sign’ of his commander’s honour; but Iago’s sar-
donic word-play identiﬁes his hypocritical service as a form of hol-
low signiﬁcation. It was perhaps Shakespeare’s recognition of the
neat ironic symbolism in the rank of Giraldi’s villain that caused
him to reconsider the rank and function of the Moor’s other ofﬁcer.
In Giraldi, Disdemona’s supposed seducer is a mere capo di
squadra—usually considered roughly equivalent to corporal. In
Shakespeare he becomes Othello’s lieutenant—not the lowly sub-
altern denoted by the term today, but his second-in-command, a
‘lieutenant-general’ as it were. Probably the dramatist felt that a
corporal would hardly seem plausible as the lover of a general’s
wife; but in elevating the capo to ofﬁcer status, he also decided to
make him Iago’s superior, thereby immediately complicating the
villain’s motives; and in making him ‘lieutenant’, he chose a term
beautifully calculated to inﬂame the wound of displacement.1

   1
     See below, ‘Interpretation’, pp. 152–4. The choice of ‘lieutenant’ (a relatively
uncommon rank in Shakespeare) must have been a pointed one, since although the
word had existed in the broad sense of ‘deputy’ or ‘second’ since the fourteenth cen-
tury, it did not appear as an English military designation before the late sixteenth—
OED’s earliest example being 1578. As military manuals of the time make clear,
it was a controversial innovation, because the lieutenant assumed duties that for-
merly belonged to the ensign; commentators also observed that the rank was not
only without precedent in admired ‘Roman discipline’, but had not been adopted by
the Spanish—a fact which may point to an additional source of resentment in Iago,
if we take his name to point to a Spanish origin—see Commentary, ‘The Persons of
the Play’.

                                         30
                                 Introduction

   In Giraldi the Ensign’s plotting is driven entirely by his desire for
the Moor’s wife and by his mistaken belief that her failure to recip-
rocate his passion is caused by her being already in love with the
capo. This conviction turns his love for her to hatred, so that the
Ensign’s anger is directed almost entirely against Disdemona, leav-
ing the Moor and even the capo as largely incidental victims of his
spite. In Shakespeare, by contrast, while Iago admits in an almost
casual way to frustrated desire for Desdemona (2.1.282–5), he con-
fesses to a bewildering array of other motives that make Cassio and
(above all) Othello the primary objects of his revenge. These
include: (ironically in view of his own Spanish name) prejudice
against foreigners, including the ‘Florentine’ Cassio (1.1.19); dis-
gust at the military and sexual triumphs of a black man (1.1.32,
88–91, 110–16); the suspicion that both Othello and Cassio have
cuckolded him (1.3.375–9; 2.1.285–90, 298); and (most conspicu-
ously of all) resentment at Cassio’s promotion to become Othello’s
second-in-command, together with bitterness at the servile nature
of his own ofﬁce (1.1.7–60). It was the sheer variety of the villain’s
professed motives that led Coleridge to accuse him of ‘the motive-
hunting of a motiveless malignity’;1 and other critics have
expressed similar scepticism at the apparently ﬂeeting and hetero-
geneous nature of his complaints, pointing out that the anger Iago
professes at being bilked of the lieutenancy is never mentioned
again after the indignant tirade with which he opens the play
(1.1.7–39).2 However, it is telling that Emilia’s slowly awakening
suspicion of her husband is intimated by her conjecture that Des-
demona has been slandered by ‘Some cogging, cozening slave, to
get some ofﬁce’ (4.2.132); and closer attention to Iago’s language
will show that the lost promotion never ceases to rankle with Iago:
he harps on his rival’s new rank with an insistence shown by no
one else in the play—ﬁfteen of the twenty-ﬁve occurrences of ‘lieu-
tenant’ are in his mouth, where it begins to sound more and more



   1
     S. T. Coleridge, Coleridge’s Shakespeare Criticism, ed. T. M. Raysor, 2 vols.
(1930), i. 49.
   2
     For an account of Iago that sees Iago’s motives as fundamentally
‘divorce[d] . . . from his dramatic personality and his actions’, and accounts for
them as a naturalistic veneer disguising his fundamental nature as a reworking of
the medieval Vice ﬁgure, see Spivack, chaps. 1, 12 (p. 58).

                                       31
                                   Introduction

like a sardonic caress that anticipates and celebrates his own
usurpation of Cassio’s ‘place’; he continues (with barely veiled sar-
casm) to address Cassio as ‘lieutenant’ after he has been cashiered
(2.3.250, 299, 318), and even after he himself has been promoted
in his rival’s stead (4.1.99; 5.1.57). Moreover, just as Iago uncov-
ered a punning licence for deceit in his own rank, so his remorse-
less iteration of Cassio’s title draws attention to the etymological
insult concealed in ‘lieutenant’—literally ‘one holding [another’s]
place’ (French lieu tenant). Dis-placement, after all, is the unifying
theme of Iago’s resentments—whether social, sexual, or psycho-
logical. By the symmetrical logic of retribution, of course, it is also
the organizing principle of Iago’s revenge, ensuring that his gnaw-
ing conviction that Othello and Cassio have ‘done my ofﬁce’
(1.3.377 and cf. 2.1.286–7, 298) will ﬁnd an exact equivalent in the
Moor’s agonized ‘Cassio shall have my place’ (4.1.253).1
   Whatever conclusion one reaches about his motives, Shake-
speare’s Ensign is certainly a more consistent and purposive
schemer than his counterpart in Giraldi. What in the original are
merely convenient accidents, in Othello become the products of his
cunning: it is Iago who engineers Cassio’s drunkenness, sets up the
brawl with Roderigo, and then urges the cashiered Lieutenant to
use Desdemona as an intercessor with his general. Desdemona’s
loss of the handkerchief may now be a matter of chance, but it is
used to emphasize Iago’s improvisational genius; so that like
Richard III, or Marlowe’s Barabas, or Jonson’s Mosca, the actor–
hypocrite also emerges as a kind of surrogate dramatist, relishing
the cleverness of his own plot in shameless appeals for the appro-
bation of the audience:


   1
      ‘The captain being absent,’ wrote Edward Davies in The Art of War (1620), ‘the
lieutenant possesseth the principal and chief place’ (sig. O2): the logic of the
tragedy’s paranoid word-play ensures that, in so far as Othello imagines Desde-
mona’s body precisely as the ‘chief place’ he has ‘occupied’, the Senate’s order must
come as a conﬁrmation of his deepest fears. For detailed analyses of how the tropes
of lieutenancy, place, and ofﬁce work in the play, see Michael Neill, ‘Changing
Places in Othello’, SS 37 (1984), 115–31 (repr. in Putting History to the Question:
Power, Politics and Society in English Renaissance Drama (New York, 2000), 207–36);
and Julia Genster, ‘Lieutenancy, Standing In and Othello’, ELH 57 (1990), 785–805.
An additional pun may be suggested by the alternative spelling ‘lieftenant’ (ances-
tral to the modern British pronunciation, ‘leftenant’), which occurs in Q1 Henry V,
5.5.95, and which OED suggests was inﬂuenced by lief = love, desire; sweetheart,
mistress.

                                         32
                               Introduction

            And what’s he then that says I play the villain,
            When this advice is free I give, and honest,
            Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
            To win the Moor again?
                                                (2.3.321–4)

The Time Scheme Of all the changes that Shakespeare made to
the original, perhaps the most notorious involves his radical
rearrangement of Giraldi’s generally non-speciﬁc time scheme,
which he subjected to a rigorous and uncharacteristic tightening.
In Giraldi, the Moor’s jealousy seems the more inexplicable
because, unlike his Shakespearian counterpart, he has lived with
Disdemona for some time in marital ‘harmony and tranquillity’
before receiving the summons to Cyprus; not only that, but Giral-
di’s repetition of such phrases as ‘one day’ and ‘soon after’ makes it
seem that events in Cyprus take place over an extended period of
time—prompting questions as to why his Moor makes no effort to
determine the veracity of the Ensign’s allegations by questioning
either his wife or her supposed lover. In Shakespeare, by contrast,
events take place with such dizzying rapidity that even the question
of whether their marriage is consummated remains clouded in
uncertainty:1 the couple are summoned before the Senate on the
ﬁrst night of their elopement, and are required to depart for Cyprus
immediately; barely are they reunited on the island than they are
once again roused from their bed by the brawl that leads to Cassio’s
disgrace (2.3); Act 3 evidently begins on the following morning,
and the murder of Desdemona (5.2) appears to take place that
same night. It is a scheme of almost neoclassical rigour—as if
Shakespeare, setting aside the lengthy dramatized prologue of Act
1, were determined to observe the traditional unities of time, place,
and action, which (except in the case of The Comedy of Errors and
The Tempest) he elsewhere disregarded.
   Yet there are moments at which a much more extensive time
scheme can seem to be implied. It is, for example, difﬁcult to under-
stand why Venice should send an order recalling Othello, and
appointing Cassio in his place (4.1.227–9) when news of the Turk-
ish ﬂeet’s destruction cannot possibly have reached them; further-
more, the relationship between Cassio and Bianca appears to be of

                 1
                     See below, ‘Interpretation’, pp. 136–8.

                                     33
                                   Introduction

much older standing than his arrival in Cyprus would allow, since
she complains that he has neglected her for an entire week
(3.4.168–71); and ﬁnally there are a whole series of remarks which
appear to suggest that Othello and Desdemona have been married
far longer than the time scheme will in fact allow—notably Othel-
lo’s claim that Desdemona ‘with Cassio hath the act of shame | A
thousand times committed’ (5.2.209–10), and Emilia’s repeated
claim that Iago ‘hath a hundred times | Wooed me to steal [the
handkerchief]’ (3.3.295–6; 312, 317–18). The cumulative effect of
such detail has been to encourage some critics to speak of an elab-
orate ‘double time scheme’, according to which Shakespeare’s
‘astonishing skill and judgement as a practical craftsman’ enables
him to play an elaborate ‘trick’ on the audience, persuading them
to accept the simultaneous operation of a ‘short time’ that makes
possible the successful execution of Iago’s plot, and a ‘long
time’ that renders plausible Othello’s extravagant conviction of
Desdemona’s inﬁdelity.1 However, the apparent inconsistencies
on which this theory is based are almost never noticed in perform-
ance; and it is telling that it should have been Rymer who ﬁrst
drew attention to them, since his entire critique was founded on a
neoclassical notion of ‘probability’2 quite alien to Shakespeare’s
practice. By the same token the elaborate theory of double-time,
invented to account for the temporal inconsistencies about which
Rymer is so sarcastic, belongs originally to the mid nineteenth cen-
tury, arising out of assumptions grounded in the realistic staging
practices of Victorian theatre, and encouraged by reading habits
associated with the emergence of literary scholarship.3 In fact, as
Graham Bradshaw has demonstrated, it is possible to account for

  1
     See Ridley’s introduction, pp. lxvii–lxx.
  2
     See above, ‘Reception’, pp. 3–5.
  3
     For useful summaries of the problems, see the introductions in the editions by
Ridley, pp. lxvii–lxx, Sanders, pp. 14–17, and Honigmann, pp. 68–73. The double-
time theory was ﬁrst advanced by John Wilson in Blackwood’s Magazine (Nov. 1849,
Apr. and May 1850). Like Rymer, Wilson argued that, while the events of the play
appear to occur in a rapid and continuous sequence (except for the time taken to sail
from Venice to Cyprus between Acts 1 and 2), the probability of the plot depends on
our assuming the much longer stretch of time between marriage and murder. The
scattering of temporal references in the dialogue encouraging such an assumption
persuaded him that Shakespeare had deliberately engineered a ‘double-time
scheme’, in which the ‘short time’ framework helped to create a sense of events
crowding towards disaster, whilst the ‘longer time’ helped to preserve the plausibil-
ity of Iago’s insinuations and Othello’s jealous fantasies.

                                        34
                                   Introduction

almost all of the ‘long time’ references by assuming that they refer
to events that occurred in Venice, during Othello’s extended
courtship, or (in some cases) on the voyage to Cyprus.1 There is, for
example, no obvious reason to presume that Bianca is a denizen of
Cyprus; and if indeed she is to be recognized as a courtesan, then
Shakespeare’s audience would probably have assumed that her
‘custom’ belonged originally to Venice, the proverbial capital of
European prostitution. Perhaps indeed she is even to be seen as the
object of Iago’s sarcasm in the opening scene, when he speaks
of Cassio as ‘almost damned in a fair wife’ (1.1.20). Moreover,
Othello’s increasingly frenzied conviction of Desdemona’s repeated
inﬁdelities is only a problem if we assume that it must refer to
the period after their marriage; but since we know that
Cassio was party to their love affair from the beginning (3.3.96–7),
‘came a-wooing’ with Othello (3.3.71–2), and even seems to have
engaged in private conversation with Desdemona about him
(3.3.72–4), there has clearly been ample opportunity for them
to make the Moor a cuckold before the fact.2 It is really only
the strange revocation of Othello’s commission that creates a
problem; and an audience might easily ascribe even that to the
inﬂuential manoeuvring of Brabantio’s faction back in Venice.3
   In the end, however, such speculation is probably pointless,
since Elizabethan dramatists were accustomed to treating time
rather as their stage encouraged them to treat space: just as a
speaker might be made, when a particular scene demanded it, to
identify the normally neutral platform stage with a particular loca-
tion, so the needs of the plot might require him to tie a particular
set of events to a speciﬁc time scheme—even while the action as a
whole remained ﬂoating in a kind of temporal limbo. The so-called

  1
     See Graham Bradshaw, Misrepresentations: Shakespeare and the Materialists
(Ithaca, NY, 1993), pp. 148–68.
   2
     Of course, as Bradshaw points out, Othello’s suspicions will seem more prob-
able if (as may be the case) the marriage is never consummated, so that the question
of Desdemona’s virginity remains moot. But, given that the devices used by whores
to fake their own virginity were well known, that need not be decisive—especially
since in any case the utter irrationality of jealousy is part of Shakespeare’s
dramatic point.
   3
     Interestingly even Rymer, with his nose for inconsistencies, explained it in this
way, declaring that Brabantio (whose death from mortiﬁcation at Desdemona’s
marriage he seems to have forgotten) ‘gets the Moor cashiered, [and] sends his kins-
man, Signor Ludovico, to Cyprus with the commission for a new general’ (p. 133).

                                         35
                                   Introduction

‘double-time’ produced by the acceleration of key elements in
Giraldi’s plot required no ingenious sleight of hand on the play-
wright’s part: it is no more than a particularly striking side-effect of
the general indifference to naturalistic handling of time and space
that Shakespeare shared with other dramatists of the period.


The Play in Performance1
As a practical man of the theatre, actor as well as playwright,
Shakespeare seems to have conceived his dramatic designs as much
in visual as in narrative terms. The great tragedies, in particular,
stamp themselves on the imagination through a series of powerful
theatrical images in which the whole meaning of a play can some-
times seem to be compacted: the graveyard in Hamlet; the storm-
lashed heath in King Lear, the weird sisters huddled about their
cauldron in Macbeth—these, not surprisingly, are among the
scenes that illustrators have chosen again and again to epitomize
the plays from which they come. In the case of Othello, it was the
pathetic spectacle of Desdemona ‘slain in our presence by her hus-
band . . . lying in her bed’ that etched itself on the memory of the
play’s ﬁrst recorded viewer, Henry Jackson, to the exclusion of any
other scene; and although other commentators singled out Iago’s
temptation of Othello (3.3) as the ‘top scene’ of the tragedy,2 it was
the shockingly expressive image of the dark-skinned murderer
standing over his unconscious wife, stretched out on their nuptial

   1
     For more thorough and detailed accounts of the play’s life in the theatre,
see Rosenberg, Hankey, and Potter. Vaughan’s Part 2, ‘Representations’, offers
accounts of representative productions from the Restoration through to Trevor
Nunn’s 1989 RSC Othello; while Pechter’s Othello and Interpretive Traditions links per-
formance and critical history with outstanding skill. Martin L. Wine’s Othello:
Text and Performance (Basingstoke, 1984) conﬁnes itself to an overview of produc-
tions between 1943 and 1982, paying particular attention to the Othello/Iago/
Desdemona teamings of Paul Robeson, José Ferrer, and Uta Hagen (1943), Laurence
Olivier, Frank Finlay, and Maggie Smith (1964), Brewster Mason, Emrys James, and
Lisa Harrow (1971–2), and James Earl Jones, Christopher Plummer, and Dianne
Wiest (1981–2). In Shakespeare in Performance: An Introduction through Six Major
Plays (New York, 1973), John Russell Brown prints a full text of the play, with an
extensive commentary describing stage business, rhetorical delivery and interpreta-
tion, together with details of outstanding nineteenth- and twentieth-century
performances.
   2
     The phrase is Rymer’s (see above, p. 3); but the commonplace book of Abra-
ham Wright, Vicar of Okeham, had made a similar claim in 1637 (see Hankey,
p. 19).

                                          36
                                   Introduction

bed, that long dominated the illustrative tradition.1 The disturbing
power of the spectacle seems to have been increased rather than
diminished by the systematic bowdlerization of Shakespeare’s
script in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which purged
the play not only of its explicit sexual language, but of every refer-
ence to the marriage bed.2 For generations of readers, beginning
with François Boitard’s engraving for Rowe’s 1709 edition (ﬁg. 4),
the eroticism and latent violence of the image served to highlight
the centrality of the tragic love affair between Desdemona and the
Moor, and (not least through the symbolic chiaroscuro favoured by
Romantic artists) to highlight the scandal of their racial mésalliance
(ﬁg. 5).
   In the twentieth century, however, when the photographic
documentation of stage and screen productions largely replaced
commissioned engravings in the visual record, the balance of
visual representation showed a marked change. The murder scene
continued to receive its share of attention; but more often than not
it was the temptation scene that was now chosen to represent the
tragedy (ﬁg. 17). Thus the painting by Peter Blake, conceived for the
1979 paperback cover of Ridley’s long-lived Arden edition, showed
Iago hovering at Othello’s shoulder, ready to pour the poison of
suspicion in his ear. The striking recurrrence of such images
reﬂected the increasing dominance of Iago in performance, and the
consequent displacement of the relationship between Othello and
Desdemona in favour of that between tempter and victim as the
principal focus of the play’s tragic concerns.3
   Needless to say, the possibility of such displacement had always
been inscribed in the text itself: as beﬁts a play about fantasies of
adultery, two competing relationships sit at the centre of Othello,
linked by the ugly symmetries that are pointed up in the language


   1
     For an extended analysis of the signiﬁcance of this image, see Michael Neill,
‘ “Unproper Beds”: Race, Adultery and the Hideous in Othello’, SQ 40 (1989),
383–412, reprinted as chap. 9 (pp. 237–68) of Putting History to the Question; all ref-
erences to this essay are to the latter version.
   2
     See Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’, p. 240.
   3
     By contrast the cover of Honigmann’s New Arden shows a photograph of a
ﬂoating handkerchief, picking up Iago’s reference to ‘triﬂes light as air’ (3.3.323),
and constituting a kind of silent homage to Rymer’s dismisssive ‘tragedy of the
handkerchief’ that accords with this editor’s tendency to play down the play’s social
and racial concerns.

                                         37
                            Introduction




           4. The bedchamber scene (Rowe’s edition, 1709).




of the temptation scene. At the climax of that episode, Othello rec-
ognizes that he is ‘bound to [Iago] for ever’ (3.3.216), and their
exchange ends in a mock-wedding through which Iago symbolic-
ally takes the ‘place’ of the Moor’s ‘fair warrior’, Desdemona,
even as he usurps that of his military second, Cassio: ‘Now art
thou my lieutenant’ (3.3.478). The play’s tragic effect depends
partly upon the performers’ ability to achieve a proper balance
between the two relationships; but this has not always been easy to
achieve. This is partly because, to modern sensibilities at least, the
character of Desdemona, unless very carefully handled, can seem
too ﬂatly and monotonously conceived to offset the theatrical mag-
netism of Iago: thus as early as 1770 we ﬁnd Francis Gentleman
suggesting that Desdemona’s ‘unvarying gentleness’ makes hers ‘a
                                 38
                                  Introduction




      5. Racialized chiaroscuro: the bedchamber scene as imagined
                            by Boydell, 1800.



part of no shining qualiﬁcations’;1 and by the end of the nine-
teenth century Iago had begun to establish an increasing ascen-
dancy over the imagination of theatregoers. Just as commentators
have typically divided themselves into ‘Othello critics’ and ‘Iago
critics’,2 so stagings of the play have a marked tendency to become
either Othello-productions or Iago-productions; and if the actor
playing Othello falls short of the heroic scale demanded by his role,
then Iago—who is, after all, given more lines than the hero—can

  1
    [Francis Gentleman], The Dramatic Censor (1770), p. 154, cited in Potter, p. 48.
  2
    For this distinction, see Carol Thomas Neely, ‘Women and Men in Othello’,
in Carolyn Lenz, Gayle Greene, and Carol Thomas Neely (eds.), The Woman’s Part:
Feminist Criticism of Shakespeare (Urbana, Ill., 1980), 211–39 (p. 211).

                                        39
                                Introduction

all too easily become the animating spirit of the whole perform-
ance. A. C. Bradley’s celebrated analysis of the play (1904), which
set the terms for so much twentieth-century criticism, signiﬁ-
cantly divides into two essays—one largely devoted to the nominal
hero, the other almost entirely to his antagonist; and Bradley’s
Iago is an almost Nietzschean ﬁgure whose astonishing ‘lordship of
the will’ makes him ‘great, almost sublime’, to the point where he
threatens to usurp the protagonist’s centrality—for ‘the tragedy of
Othello is . . . his tragedy too. . . . [the tragedy of] a thoroughly bad,
cold man, who is at last tempted to let loose the forces within him,
and is at once destroyed.’1
   If the post-Victorian performance history of Othello has been
characterized by the growing dominance of Iago, from the last
quarter of the twentieth century it has also been marked by an
increasingly urgent preoccupation with Shakespeare’s treatment
of colour and its implications for casting. There may indeed be a
connection between these two developments, since productions
that focus on Othello’s tragically mistaken jealousy of Desdemona
necessarily tend towards an unconscious endorsement of the tradi-
tional moral symbolism of black and white, inviting at least a par-
tial acceptance of Emilia’s judgement—‘the more angel she, and
you the blacker devil’ (5.2.131). In contrast, productions that focus
on Iago’s seduction of the Moor, by reversing the conventional
valencies, necessarily problematize the signiﬁcance of colour, and
invite a more probing response to the play’s treatment of ‘race’.
Because the resulting controversies are so closely related to the crit-
ical debate that emerged at the same time over the nature of Othel-
lo’s implication in the history of racial thinking, I have chosen—at
the risk of some structural clumsiness—to devote a separate sec-
tion of my performance history to the vexed issue of the protag-
onist’s colour and how it should be represented on the stage.

Playing Black
      I cannot go on stage and give audiences a black man who is a
      dupe.
                                                         Sidney Poitier2

  1
     Bradley, pp. 178–9.
  2
     Quoted in James Earl Jones and Penelope Niven, James Earl Jones: Voices and
Silences (New York, 1993), p. 298.

                                      40
                                  Introduction

       I remember the ﬁrst time I saw my husband and I caught
       a glimpse of his skin, and, oh, how I thrilled. I thought—
       aha!—a man of a different color. From another world and
       planet. I thought if I marry this strange dark man, I can leave
       this narrow little Venice with its whispering piazzas behind—
       I can escape and see other worlds.
       (Pause)
       But under that exotic façade was a porcelain white Venetian.1
                 Paula Vogel, Desdemona: A Play about a Handkerchief

Anxieties about the treatment of race in Othello are a recurrent fea-
ture of both its critical and performance histories: where they once
focused on the supposed scandal of miscegenation, they are nowa-
days more likely to address the play’s complicity in racial stereo-
typing. Indignation and disgust at the union of Othello and
Desdemona were clearly among the driving motives of Rymer’s
derisive attack: he returns repeatedly to the impropriety of the
match between a senator’s daughter and a ‘blackamoor’ in terms
that recall the racial slurs of Iago; and, citing Horace on the unnat-
ural commingling of species—non ut | Serpentes avibus geminentur,
tigribus agni (‘snakes do not mate with birds, or lambs with tigers’)
implies a consonance between the ‘monstrous’ nature of the
match and the monstrousness of the play’s mixed design as a
‘bloody farce’.2 There is clearly a connection between Rymer’s con-
temptuous attitude towards Africans and the rapid acceleration of
British involvement in the slave trade at the end of the seventeenth
century; yet oddly enough the eighteenth century seemed, for the
most part, to ﬁnd the idea of a black hero relatively unproblematic.
In this it was perhaps assisted by Behn’s and Southerne’s romanti-
cization of the slave predicament, as well as by a discreet bowdler-
ization that purged the text of much of its sexual suggestiveness.3
However, concern with Othello’s colour re-emerged strongly dur-
ing the years of political turmoil that followed the French Revolu-
tion as abolitionism gathered strength.4 In France itself, Ducis,
  1
     Quoted from Fischlin and Fortier (eds.), Adaptations of Shakespeare, p. 242.
  2
     Rymer, pp. 88, 146. On critical denunciations of the play’s ‘monstrosity’ and
their relationship to horror of miscegenation, see Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’, esp.
pp. 260–2, and below, pp. 138–47.
  3
     See ‘Unproper Beds’, pp. 240, 464 n. 8.
  4
     On the effect of abolitionism upon responses to Othello, see Ruth Cowhig,
‘Blacks in English Renaissance Drama and the Role of Shakespeare’s Othello’, in
David Dabydeen (ed.), The Black Presence in English Literature (Manchester, 1985).

                                        41
                                    Introduction

implicitly linking his version of the play to the slave revolt in Haiti,
referred to ‘le sans-culotte Othello’, while Talma’s performance was
hailed as an artistic expression of the republican spirit with its dis-
dain for ‘the aristocracy of colour’.1 In such a context it is easy to
see how Coleridge’s notorious repudiation of ‘a veritable negro’
Othello as ‘something monstrous’ was entirely in accord with the
reactionary anti-Jacobinism of his later years.2
   Much grosser expressions of the sentiments voiced by Coleridge
are to be found in the burlesque parodies of Othello which ﬂour-
ished in England between the abolition of the slave trade in 1807
and that of slavery itself in 1833, and which enjoyed further popu-
larity across the Atlantic in the wake of United States abolition
(1865). English examples include the anonymous Othello-Travestie
(1813) and Maurice Dowling’s ‘Operatic Burlesque Burletta’, Othel-
lo Travestie (1834), while the extensive American list includes
George W. H. Grifﬁn’s Othello (Ethiopian Burlesque), ‘as performed
by Grifﬁn and Christy’s Minstrels, New York’ (c.1870), and two
anonymous pieces, Desdemonum. An Ethiopian Burlesque (1874),
and Dar’s de Money (Othello Burlesque), ‘As originally performed at
Wood’s Minstrels’ Hall, New York’ (c.1880).3 The burlesques use
increasingly crude parody to neutralize the racial anxieties stirred
up by Shakespeare’s play (ﬁg. 6), translating its sublime word-
music into absurd jingles and compressing the plot so as to suggest
its kinship with farce. The 1813 Othello-Travestie reduces Lodovico’s
choric conclusion to a doggerel paraphrase of Rymer:

  1
     Hankey, p. 76.
  2
     Coleridge (ed. Raysor), i. 47.
  3
     Parasitic on this tradition is Alexander Do Mar’s burlesque ballad (in ﬁve acts)
entitled Othello: An Interesting Drama, Rather (n.d. [c.1850]). For a full listing see
Henry E. Jacobs and Claudia D. Johnson, An Annotated Bibliography of Shakespearean
Burlesques, Parodies, and Travesties (New York, 1976), pp. 55–9. So closely had Othel-
lo become linked with the unsavoury tradition of minstrel burlesque, that a ver-
sion of French’s Standard Drama edition published in the United States in the
1860s (Harvard Theatre Collection prompt-books, Othello 298) contained an adver-
tisement for a series entitled ‘The Ethiopian Drama’, with titles including The
Mischievous Nigger, The Black Shoemaker, and Oh, Hush, or the Vurginny Cupids. The
implications of this tradition for ‘the play’s staging of race and racial difference’ are
explored by Joyce Green Macdonald, ‘Acting Black: Othello, Othello Burlesques, and
the Performance of Blackness’, Theatre Journal, 46 (1994), 231–49; Macdonald, who
gives extended attention to Dowling’s burlesque, sees it as part of the response to
Aldridge’s ﬁrst London appearance as Othello (1825) and the Jamaican slave rebel-
lion of 1831, as well as to the 1833 Emancipation Act, but does not explore coinci-
dence of the American burlesques with the period of Reconstruction.

                                          42
                               Introduction




         6. The burlesque tradition: the wooing of Desdemona,
    illustrated in Alexander Do Mar’s Othello: An Interesting Drama,
                            Rather (c.1850).


             Learn hence, ye gentlemen declined in years,
             For Gretna-marriages no luck appears;–
             Of ridicules let ladies know no lack,
             Nor let the fair sex ever wed the black.1

The reactionary politics of burlesque are even more conspicuous in
Dowling’s 1834 Travestie: ﬁrst performed in the former slaving port
of Liverpool, and then transferred to London, it followed hard on
the pro-slavery lobby’s successful campaign against the Covent
Garden production of Othello in 1833, starring the black American
Ira Aldridge. The published text of Dowling’s burlesque shows his
Othello in late eighteenth-century military costume and identiﬁes
him as ‘formerly an Independent Nigger, from the Republic of Hayti’,
                     1
                         Othello-Travestie (1813), p. 57.

                                      43
                                  Introduction

whilst his whisky-drinking Iago, familiarly addressed as ‘Pat’, is
said to have been ‘once a native of the Gaultee Mountains, County
of Tipperary’. This district was a notorious haunt of Irish rebels;
and the ancient Irish war-cry, transcribed by the English as
‘Hubbaboo’, forms the chorus of one of Iago’s songs. Though still
nominally a general, Dowling’s Othello addresses even his white
inferiors as ‘Massa’ and speaks in a ridiculous minstrel dia-
lect, singing ‘What is de cause’ to the popular tune ‘King of the
Cannibal Islands’. Not surprisingly ‘Master Blacky’ proves unable
to kill his white wife, who brings the action to a close with a boun-
cing resurrection.1
    In England, at least, the decision by Edmund Kean and his suc-
cessors to play the Moor as a relatively pale North African seems to
have gradually defused the controversy over the hero’s colour. But
this was not the case in the United States, where the play had a
potentially dangerous political charge. Thus Edwin Forrest, whose
success in the lead-role brought him to fame in 1826, declared him-
self proud to be ‘the impersonator of oppressed races’—though the
savage ferocity he brought to the role may have compromised this
worthy aim.2 Not surprisingly Othello attracted particular hos-
tility in the turbulent period of Reconstruction after the Civil War,
when a series of travesties found their way to the American stage.
One at least exploited Dowling’s device of matching a minstrel
Othello with an Irish Iago in order to include immigrants in its
racist abuse: indeed, George Grifﬁn’s wretched Ethiopian Burlesque
reduces the shame of Desdemona’s miscegenation with the ‘white-
washer’ Othello3 by extending its chauvinistic ridicule not only to
Iago, but to Brabantio, whose German Jewish accent exposes his
membership of another despised group. By contrast, in the latest
and most degraded of these parodies, Desdemonum and Dar’s de
Money, the threat posed by racial intermarriage was removed
altogether through the simple expedient of converting the entire
cast to blackface minstrel-characters.4

  1
     Maurice Dowling, Othello Travestie (1834), pp. 2, 4, 14, 34, 36.
  2
     See Potter, pp. 36–7; Hankey, pp. 71–3.
  3
     George W. H. Grifﬁn, Othello (Ethiopian Burlesque) (Clyde, Ohio, n.d), p. 3.
   4
     Desdemonum. An Ethiopian Burlesque (New York, 1874), and Dar’s de Money
(Othello Burlesque) (London and New York, n.d.). Desdemonum seems to have been
conceived partly as a showcase for its publishers’ other products, which (according
to an advertisement in the text) included Prepared Burnt Cork and Mongolian Paste

                                       44
                                   Introduction

   A more orthodox means of addressing the racial anxieties stirred
up by the tragedy was to play down Othello’s blackness by oriental-
izing the Moor. Much critical ink has been wasted on the debate,
initiated by Coleridge and Lamb, over the exact nature of Othello’s
colour.1 It is of course true that the term ‘Moor’ was a remarkably
ﬂexible one in the early seventeenth century (ﬁg. 7): not only was it
indiscriminately applied to both North Africans and sub-Saharan
Negroes (sometimes subdivided into ‘White’, ‘Tawny’, and ‘Black’
Moors), but it could also be deployed as a religious category denot-
ing all Muslims (regardless of their ethnicity), or used as a loose
descriptor of colour, embracing on occasion even the inhabitants
of the New World.2 However, the language of the play—especially
the slurs of Iago, Roderigo, and Brabantio—makes it fairly plain
that (as with Aaron the Moor in Titus Andronicus) it was a black
African that Shakespeare had in mind. The stage tradition,
moreover, is unequivocal: from Betterton in the late seventeenth
century until Kemble at the end of the eighteenth, the hero was
invariably played in blackface as a sub-Saharan ‘black Moor’.
Thomas Rymer was clearly used to seeing the Moor performed just
as he is represented in the ﬁrst known illustration of the play—an
engraving commissioned for Rowe’s 1709 edition—as ‘a Black-
moor Captain’ (ﬁg. 4);3 and, although the only eyewitness account
from Shakespeare’s lifetime is unspeciﬁc about the appearance of
the Moor, there is every reason to think that this tradition simply

(‘for Indians, Mulattoes, etc.’): in Desdemonum’s ﬁrst speech, she declares: ‘Since
burnt-cork am de fashion, I’ll not be behind— | I’ll see Oteller’s wisage in his high-
falutin’ mind’ (p. 3).
   1
      The nineteenth-century debate can be traced through Furness’s extensive
Appendix on ‘Othello’s Colour’ (pp. 389–96), where the balance of opinion is over-
whelmingly in favour of a light-skinned Moor. Particularly revealing is Knight’s
paradoxical insistence that ‘[w]hatever may have been the practice of the stage,
even in Shakespeare’s time,—and it is by no means improbable that Othello was rep-
resented as a Negro,—the whole context of the play is against the notion’ (p. 390).
By contrast, George Lewes insisted that ‘Othello is black,—the very tragedy lies
there: the whole force of the contrast, the whole pathos and extenuation of his
doubts of Desdemona, depend on this blackness’ (p. 395). Furness himself was
aware that the issue was complicated by the remarkable elasticity of the term ‘black’
in early modern parlance (p. 395)—a point that has been elaborately documented in
recent historicist criticism.
   2
      See Michael Neill, ‘ “Mulattos,” “Blacks,” and “Indian Moors”: Othello and
Early Modern Constructions of Human Difference’, SQ 49 (1998), 361–74, reprinted
as chap. 10 of Putting History to the Question.
   3
      Rymer, p. 88.

                                         45
Introduction




         7. White and Black Moors
         (from Vecellio, De Gli Habiti,
         1590).
    46
                                   Introduction

carried on from the practice established by Richard Burbage, the
original performer of the part. So it was probably not until Edmund
Kean took over the role in 1814 that Othello was ﬁrst presented as
a relatively light-skinned North African (ﬁg. 13). Indeed, Kean’s
contemporaries were quite clear about the radical nature of this
departure, one of them complaining that ‘for two hundred years,
Othello was supposed to be a black man (in common parlance—a
black-a-moor)’.1 According to his ﬁrst biographer, ‘Kean regarded
it as a gross error to make Othello either a negro or a black, and
accordingly altered the conventional black to the light brown
which distinguishes the Moors by virtue of their descent from the
Caucasian race.’2 Kean’s ostensible motive was the desire, in the
interests of greater physical expressiveness, not to obscure his
features; but the extraordinary power of this performance must
have had something to do with the actor’s careful balancing of
‘civilized’ appearance and ‘savage’ affect, his unaccustomed pallor
serving to offset his barbaric extremes of passion.3
   The enormous success of Kean’s innovation prepared the way
for generations of tawny North African Moors, culminating in
the digniﬁed ‘Oriental’ embodied by Beerbohm Tree (ﬁg. 8), who
envisaged the Moor as ‘a stately Arab of the best caste’.4 This
transformation of stage practice had the additional advantage of


   1
     Cited from the anonymous prefatory note to an edition of the play published by
Thomas Hailes Lacy (London:, n.d.) and used as a prompt-book at the Birmingham
Theatre Royal in the 1860s (Birmingham Shakespeare Library, promptbook,
S.l./Oth.3). The author cited details from the play itself and the evidence of Rowe’s
illustration—based (he claimed) on information from Betterton, who had learned it
from Davenant, who himself knew Shakespeare—to argue that this was how the
part had originally been conceived. This was why all actors from Quin to Kemble
had ‘played the part in black face’. Thus he complained that ‘it was reserved for
Edmund Kean to innovate and Coleridge to justify (upon expediency) the attempt to
make Othello a brown moor. . . . The American commentators . . . are particularly
conﬁdent upon the subject; but their opinions, however supported by able and inge-
nious special pleading, must fail with those who expect evidence, not eloquence to
establish a point in question. Mr Kean’s motive in the matter was, that his features
were better seen with a light than a dark colour. The Americans have the all-
powerful prejudice of education and custom to palliate their attempt to invert
Shakespeare’s meaning. The continental students of our great bard . . . never fell
into the heresy. Everywhere, excepting in America and upon the English stage,
Othello is black.’
   2
     Hawkins, Life of Edmund Kean, i. 221, cited in Furness, p. 390.
   3
     See Hankey, pp. 56–61; Rosenberg, pp. 61–9.
   4
     Hankey, p. 67.

                                        47
                               Introduction




    8. ‘A stately Arab of the best caste’: Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree
         as Othello, with Phyllis Neilson-Terry as Desdemona
                     (His Majesty’s Theatre, 1912).



distancing the tragic Othello from his blackface counterparts in the
minstrel travesties; and for perhaps a century and a half, it was
largely effective, if not in suppressing the racial dimension of the
play, at least in reducing it to the point where it could safely be
exploited for purely sensational purposes—whether in the ‘animal’
excess that so excited onlookers in performances by the Italians
Tommaso Salvini and Ernesto Rossi,1 or in the ‘thrilling’
chiaroscuro effect exploited by Macready in the murder scene,
when he thrust ‘his dark, despairing face’ through the virgin white

               1
                   Hankey, pp. 83–91; Rosenberg, pp. 102–19.

                                     48
                                   Introduction

curtains of Desdemona’s bed.1 Charles Fechter’s 1861 Othello may
have suggested, by much agonized play with a hand-mirror, that
‘It is the cause’ referred to the Moor’s colour;2 but for most Victor-
ians and their successors in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century,
Othello’s difference was typically understood not so much as a
matter of race, as of the cultural clash implicit in Iago’s contrast
between ‘an erring barbarian and a super-subtle Venetian’
(1.3.348–9). Thus the Athenaeum described Salvini’s Moor as a
‘barbarian, whose instincts, savage and passionate, are concealed
beneath a veneer of civilization so thick that he is himself scarcely
conscious he can be other than he appears. . . . In the end the
barbarian triumphs.’3
   This was an approach that ﬂattered notions of European su-
periority whilst conveniently damping down the racial anxieties
aroused by the text’s emphasis on the hero’s blackness. There was,
of course, a racial subtext to this story of barbaric relapse—one
that typically surfaced in the recurrent metaphors of animality,
unconscious echoes of Iago’s slurs, with which critics signalled
their approbation of the Italians’ acting. Salvini was a ‘splendid
brute’ to Clara Morris; whilst he struck Henry James (despite
his reservations about Rossi’s ‘bestial fury’) as a ‘magniﬁcent
creature’—‘tiger-like’ in his rage and ‘a wounded animal’ in his
remorse.4 Others were equally impressed by this portrait of an
‘angry lion’, ‘an incarnation of animal fury’, who in the murder
scene emitted ‘growls as of a wild beast over his prey’; and the
Galaxy reviewer felt ‘impatient for his death, as you might be for the

  1
     Hankey, p. 64.
  2
     Hankey, p. 68; James Earl Jones conveyed the same idea in Joe Papp’s 1964 pro-
duction by placing Desdemona’s white hand next to his own ‘making the line a
comment on race prejudice’ (Edith Oliver, New Yorker, 24 Oct. 1964; cited in Potter,
p. 161).
   3
     Athenaeum, 10 Apr. 1875; The Galaxy, 16 (18 Dec. 1873) similarly called
Salvini’s Othello ‘a superbly, though but physically, developed barbarian, whom
the civilization of Venice has simply veneered’—both cited in Rosenberg, p. 103.
   4
     Clara Morris, Stage Conﬁdences (1902), p. 240, cited in Hankey, p. 88; Henry
James, The Scenic Art: notes on acting and the drama, 1872–1901, ed. Allen Wade
(1949), pp. 173–5, 189. The ‘wild beast’ comparison seems ﬁrst to have been sug-
gested by the later performances of Macready (who reminded Fanny Kemble, when
she played Desdemona, of ‘a tiger in his cage’); on the other side of the Atlantic the
animal savagery of Edwin Forrest’s Moor was much admired (see Potter, p. 37).
Later reviewers would describe Beerbohm Tree’s Othello in much the same terms
(Potter, p. 90).

                                         49
                                  Introduction

death of a mad dog let loose in the streets’.1 The unspoken connec-
tion between bestial passion and African savagery becomes explicit
in a handwritten note by the American actor Marcus J. Moriarty in
his copy of the play (c.1875): ‘Othello is an untamed animal,
grandly majestic—with Africa’s blood ﬂowing in his veins. A man
of passions so strong . . . [that] once roused, knew no bounds.’2
Part of the thrill of the Italian Othellos clearly lay in their ability to
release the racial fantasies that Victorian stage convention had
only half succeeded in suppressing.
   Generally speaking, however, it was only on those very rare
occasions when a black actor, such as Ira Aldridge (ﬁg. 9) or Paul
Robeson (ﬁg. 10), was cast in the leading role that race would be
identiﬁed as a central issue in the play. Almost invariably this
seems to have been because the casting itself was enough to
collapse the distance (always vulnerable in this play) between
performer and role. Promoted as ‘the African Roscius’ and credited
with a history that uncannily mirrored Othello’s own, Aldridge
faced a largely patronizing response in England, but enjoyed
conspicuous success in continental Europe where he was hailed
as ‘the real Othello’, whose absolute verisimilitude was derived
from his alleged origins as a genuine ‘Negro from Africa’s western
coast’;3 he was, critics proclaimed, an artist so completely
invested in his part that he utterly overwhelmed the feelings of his
audience. According to a French reviewer who saw him in St
Petersburg,
from the ﬁrst moment of the cunning accusation against Desdemona, you
see his eyes ﬂash, you feel the tears in his voice when he questions Iago, fol-
lowed by stiﬂed sobs that almost choke him, and . . . [then] a cry of anger
or rather the roaring of a wild beast escapes him, coming from the bottom
of his heart. That shriek still seems to sound in my ears; it sent a thrill of
horror through all the spectators. Real tears roll down his cheek, he foams
at the mouth, his eyes ﬂash ﬁre; never have I seen an artist so completely
identify himself with the person he represents. An actor told me he saw the
great tragedian sob for several minutes after he came behind the scenes.


  1
     William Winter, Shakespeare on the Stage (New York, 1911), p. 298; J. R. Towse,
Sixty Years of Theatre (New York, 1916), p. 163; Galaxy, 16—all in Rosenberg,
pp. 111, 113, 103; for other examples see Vaughan, pp. 167–8.
  2
     Folger Promptbook Oth. 40.
  3
     Anonymous German reviewer, cited in Hankey, p. 81.

                                        50
                                   Introduction




    9. ‘Naturally un-white’: the African-American actor Ira Aldridge
                               as Othello.


The public did not fail to be deeply touched, all wept, both men and
women.1

On this same evening the actress playing Desdemona was report-
edly so terriﬁed by Aldridge’s expression in the murder scene ‘that
she jumped out of bed, and ran away screaming with real terror’
and was persuaded to return only with the greatest difﬁculty.2
Aldridge’s extreme identiﬁcation with Othello’s suffering arose
directly, it was suggested, from his own past: through his

   1
     St Petersburg correspondent of Le Nord (23 Nov. 1858), quoted in Errol Hill,
Shakespeare in Sable: A History of Black Shakespearean Actors (Amherst, Mass., 1984),
p. 24.
   2
     Anonymous Le Nord correspondent (23 Nov. 1858), quoted in Hankey, p. 82.

                                         51
                                   Introduction

performance, according to the Russian critic K. Zvantsev, who had
seen him in St Petersburg,
the liberation of the Negro in the United States . . . becomes something
internal, not only for the enslaved people, but for us all. . . . From Othello is
torn the deep cry ‘O misery, misery, misery!’ and in that misery of the
African artist is heard the far-off groans of his own people, oppressed by
unbelievable slavery.1

But so persuasive were the ‘savage, and uncontrolled elements’ in
the passion of this ‘genuine tiger’ that some viewers found them
unbearable—most famously a woman writing to the Slavophile
newspaper Dyen after another of Aldridge’s Russian performances
in 1863. In prose whose febrile eloquence exposes the bizarre
excitement that underlay her appalled response, she denounced
what she saw as the performer’s inadmissible assault on aesthetic
distance:
A full-blooded Negro, incarnating the profoundest creations of
Shakespearean art, giving ﬂesh and blood for the aesthetic judgment of Edu-
cated European society . . . how much nearer can one get to truth, to the
very source of aesthetic satisfaction? But what is truth . . . ? As the spirit is
not the body, so the truth of art is not this profoundly raw ﬂesh. . . . Not
the Moscow Maly Theater, but the African jungle should have been ﬁlled
and resounded with . . . the cries of this black, powerful, howling ﬂesh.
But by the very fact that ﬂesh is so powerful—that it is genuinely black, so
naturally un-white does it howl—that savage ﬂesh did its ﬂeshly work. It
murdered and crushed the spirit . . . and in place of the highest enjoy-
ment, this blatant ﬂesh introduced into art, this natural black Othello, par-
don me, causes only . . . revulsion.2

   In contrast to those in England who continued to espouse the
orientalized Othello, the author of this passage was in no doubt that
Othello was intended to be a black African: her objection was to the
playing of the part by a black actor—an objection that a century
later was to be revoiced from a very different perspective by those
who had begun to see the part as a stereotypical caricature with

  1
     K. Zvantsev, Ira Aldridge: BiographicheskiOcherk (St Petersburg, 1858), cited in
Hankey, p. 81. The emotive power of Aldridge’s Russian performances was appar-
ently enhanced by his deliberate play on the parallels between black slavery and
Russian serfdom—see Iyengar in Kolin, p. 110, and Potter, p. 116.
  2
     N. S. Sodkhanskaya (‘N. Kokhanovskaya’), Dyen (1863), quoted in Herbert
Marshall and Mildred Stock, Ira Aldridge: The Negro Tragedian (1958), pp. 265–6.

                                         52
                                 Introduction




10. ‘The suffering of the Negro in the role of the Moor’: Paul Robeson as
   Othello, with Peggy Ashcroft as Desdemona (Savoy Theatre, 1930).


which no black performer could honourably be associated.1 But ﬁrst
there was a battle to be fought over the right of such actors to play
the part at all—especially given the overwhelming predominance of
fair-skinned Moors in the performance tradition. For the German
makers of the 1922 silent ﬁlm of Othello it was not enough to
cast Emil Jannings as a fair-skinned North African in a kaftan—a
subtitle even had him declare a half-white lineage: ‘I am [the] son of
[an] Egyptian prince and [a] Spanish princess—my blood is
fair like hers, my wife’s.’2 But in the same year a reviewer from the
British popular press, complaining about the sallow make-up of
William Stack’s Othello, could aver that ‘there can be no doubt that
to Shakespeare Othello was not only a Moor, but a black Moor’;3 and
when, eight years later, the black American singer Paul Robeson
was chosen to play the part at London’s Savoy Theatre (ﬁg. 10), The

                  1
                      See below, pp. 69–71.
                  2
                      Othello, dir. Dmitri Buchowetski, 1922.
                  3
                      Morning Post, 20 Apr. 1922.

                                       53
                                   Introduction

Times praised the production for reviving the ‘stage-tradition that
held down to the time of Edmund Kean of a coal-black Othello’.1
But the circulation of such views did not make the casting any less
controversial.
   Robeson, who reputedly took instruction in the role from
Ira Aldridge’s daughter,2 offered a conspicuously restrained
Othello—no doubt because this eminently political performer
was conscious of how easily the role could slide into stereotypical
caricature.3 The result was that his performance did not arouse
such extravagant audience reactions as Ira Aldridge had done;
but once again the casting served to highlight the play’s racial
concerns, giving them a contemporary charge that eroded the
boundary between actor and role. Robeson’s acting, like
Aldridge’s, was described as exceptionally ‘natural’; but this was
not necessarily seen as an advantage. James Agate, for example,
adding his voice to those critics who insisted that ‘Shakespeare’s
Moor was not written for a coloured actor of any kind’ but ‘for a
white man to play’,4 argued that Robeson’s performance was
vitiated by precisely the wrong kind of naturalness:
Coming away from the theatre on Monday evening, a lady was heard to
say that the performance had seemed to her to be exceedingly natural.
Precisely. But according to whose nature?—that of Shakespeare’s Moor or
of the player who enacted him? . . . [T]he reason that Mr Robeson failed to
be Othello was that he had none of [his] highly civilized quality. . . . He
was not like the base Indian who threw a pearl away . . . he was the base
Indian.5
In this extremely negative account of a performance that he
infamously dismissed as ‘nigger Shakespeare’,6 Agate granted
   1
     The Times, 20 May 1930. E. A. Baughan in the Daily News demurred, however:
‘Shakespeare’s Moor was not written for a coloured actor of any kind. I agree with
Coleridge that Othello must not be conceived as a negro, but a high and chivalrous
Moorish chief’ (19 May 1930).
   2
     Gerard Fay, Manchester Guardian, 6 Apr. 1959; Robeson apparently visited
Amanda Aldridge at her home in Streatham whilst rehearsing for the 1930
production.
   3
     A similar anxiety, resulting in a tendency to stress Othello’s dignity and
restraint at the expense of passion, seems to have afﬂicted most black actors cast in
the role; see Marks, pp. 109–17.
   4
     Baughan, Daily News, 19 May 1930; Herbert Farjeon, The Shakespearean Scene
(n.d.), p. 165 (cited in Vaughan, p. 188).
   5
     Sunday Times, 19 May 1930.
   6
     James Agate, Brief Chronicles: A Survey of the Plays of Shakespeare and the
Elizabethans in Actual Performance (1943), p. 287 (cited in Vaughan, p. 188).

                                         54
                                   Introduction

Robeson a ‘beautiful voice’, but patronizingly declared that ‘to ask
any Negro actor, however great his qualities of mind and heart, to
recite Shakespeare’s blank verse would be like asking your bright
English schoolboy to jump at once into the silver stride of Racine or
Corneille’.1 In a similar vein, Herbert Farjeon thought that as ‘a
member of a subject race, still dragging the chains of his ancestors’
Robeson must necessarily be incapable of the grandeur which the
part demanded.2
  By contrast, for other reviewers, such as Ivor Brown, Robeson’s
blackness allowed him an instinctive understanding of the part:
Mr Robeson’s ebon Othello is as sturdy as oak . . . a superb giant of the
woods for the great hurricane of tragedy to whisper through, then rage
upon, then break. One thinks of a tree, because the greatness is of nature,
not of art. . . . [A]t his best in bewilderment. . . . [h]e is of a younger world,
a junior as well as an alien, a child as well as a warrior-chief. . . . And
when the devilry is done, you can understand the more his complete
relapse to a barbaric rage.3

The success of Robeson’s Othello, Brown implies, resulted from
those stereotypical aspects of his black ‘nature’ (childishness, a
warrior temperament, and innate barbarism) that he shared with
Shakespeare’s character. Whether as a political activist, or as a
supremely self-conscious artist, Robeson must have had decidedly
mixed feelings about this kind of praise—just as he must have
had reservations about his director, Nellie Van Volkenburg, whose
approach to the play was compromised, in Peggy Ashcroft’s judge-
ment, by her unmistakable racism.4 Nevertheless he openly ex-
pressed his own identiﬁcation with the part and (not surprisingly)
saw the play as a mirror for the ‘position [of the] coloured man
in America today’ and as an opportunity to ‘portray the suffering
of the Negro in the role of the Moor’.5 Of the Savoy production,

  1
     Sunday Times, 19 May 1930. Similar complaints were made of Aldridge’s
performance by the Times reviewer who thought that proper articulation of
Shakespearian verse must be impossible ‘owing to the shape of his lips’, whilst the
Athenaeum critic believed it ‘impossible Mr Aldridge should fully comprehend the
meaning and force or even the words he utters’ (cited in Hankey, pp. 80–1).
  2
     Farjeon, p. 165, cited in Rosenberg, p. 152.
  3
     The Observer, 25 May 1930.
  4
     Iyengar in Kolin, p. 112.
  5
     Paul Robeson, ‘My Fight for Fame. How Shakespeare Paved My Way to Star-
dom’, Pearson’s Weekly, 5 Apr. 1930, p. 1100, and Edwin P. Hoyt, Paul Robeson (Cleve-
land, 1967), p. 51 (both cited in Vaughan, p. 187). Cf. also Rosenberg, pp. 151–2.

                                         55
                                  Introduction

the actor declared: ‘Othello has taken away from me all kinds of
fears, all sense of limitation, and all racial prejudice. Othello has
opened to me new and wider ﬁelds; in a word, Othello has made me
free.’1
   It was a remarkable testament from the son of an escaped slave;
and one that deserves pondering, in the light of some more recent
assertions about the play’s complicity in racism. For the Express
reviewer, at least, this Othello was both an artistic success and a
political victory that amply vindicated the courage of the company
who staged it:
A wonderful audience cheered Robeson’s triumph. . . . Coloured people
sat dotted about the house. . . . One editor walked out after the third act,
saying he did not like to be near coloured people. . . . [But] Robeson’s art
conquered all. Why should a black actor be allowed to kiss a white actress,
I heard people say beforehand. There was no protest of that kind in the
theatre.2

   Plans for a New York season foundered, apparently through fear
of American prejudice; but Robeson’s London triumph ultimately
prepared the way for his collaboration with Margaret Webster
in a wartime performance which, after its transfer to Broadway in
1943, would become America’s longest-running Shakespeare pro-
duction. Webster’s own comments on Othello’s character suggest
that the casting of Robeson was driven by the same essentialist
understanding of his blackness that marked reviewers’ reactions to
the Savoy production:
He is more somber, profound and dangerous, primitive in simplicity,
primitive also in violence, alien in blood. The gulf which divides him
from Desdemona . . . is a gulf between two races, one old and soft in the
ways of civilization, the other close to the jungle, and the burning, desert
sands.3

Nevertheless, like the Savoy Othello, this was a political and artistic
milestone, powerful enough to persuade one reviewer that ‘no


  1
     Quoted from Martin Bauml Duberman, Paul Robeson (1989), p. 137. For an
equally positive response to the role by another prominent African-American actor,
see James Earl Jones, Othello (2003).
  2
     ‘H.S.’, Express, 20 May 1930.
  3
     Margaret Webster, Shakespeare Without Tears (New York, 1975), p. 178 (cited in
Vaughan, p. 195).

                                        56
                                  Introduction

white man should ever dare play the part again’.1 In fact, how-
ever—with the exception of the ageing Robeson’s return to the
part at Stratford in 1959—Othello would continue to be the virtual
monopoly of white actors for another four decades. Although such
major ﬁgures as Orson Welles (1951), Anthony Quayle (1952–4),
and John Gielgud (1961) all turned their backs on the still dominant
convention of pale-skinned Arab Othellos, it was not until 1963
that another black actor was cast in the role on the London or
Stratford stages. Though predictably admired for ‘sheer sincerity
and passion of distress’,2 Errol John’s Old Vic performance (like
Robeson’s before it) illustrated what was soon to emerge as a re-
current paradox of Othello productions: for, even as aesthetic and
political pressures converged to make the casting of white actors in
the lead role appear increasingly undesirable, black actors them-
selves were repeatedly disabled by fear of the racial stereotyping
that might ensue from a full commitment to the emotional excess
and extravagant theatricality of the part. The same problem was to
arise to a greater or lesser degree with Joseph Marcell at the Lyric
Studio Theatre, Hammersmith, with Rudolph Walker at the Young
Vic (both in 1984), with Willard White at the Royal Shakespeare
Company’s Other Place (1989), with David Harewood at the
National’s Lyttelton Theatre (1997), and with Ray Fearon at the
Royal Shakespeare Theatre (1999).3 Comprehensively upstaged by
the ‘thunderous energy and broad comic effect’ of Leo McKern’s
Iago,4 John’s Othello was almost immediately overshadowed by
Laurence Olivier’s overwhelming success in John Dexter’s produc-
tion at the same theatre a year later.
   Conceptually speaking, Dexter’s Othello was a strange hybrid:
consciously indebted to F. R. Leavis’s inﬂuential essay, which was
extensively quoted in the programme, it preserved the Victorian
idea of Othello as a vain and posturing barbarian whose thin

  1
     Quoted in Potter, ‘Unhaply for I am white’, TLS, 5 Mar. 1999, p. 19.
  2
     Philip Hope-Wallace, Manchester Guardian, 31 Jan. 1963.
  3
     In fact there is evidence that even Aldridge had been handicapped by such anx-
ieties: Théophile Gautier, expecting something ‘a little barbaric and savage in the
manner of Kean’, was disappointed to ﬁnd that ‘doubtless to appear as civilized
as a white, he has a quiet acting style, regulated, classic, majestic, recalling
Macready . . . he smothers Desdemona with taste, and he roars properly’—Voyage
en Russie (Paris, n.d.), pp. 154 ff., cited in Rosenberg, p. 279.
   4
     The Times, 31 Jan. 1963. (Times reviews were still anonymous, as they often
were in newspapers generally until around this date.)

                                        57
                                  Introduction

veneer of civilization disintegrates under pressure; but at the same
time it claimed ‘a contemporary urgency lacking in its prede-
cessors’ by its explicit ‘concern with the relations between the
black and the white races’.1 For Dexter, Othello was a ‘pompous,
word-spinning, arrogant black general’ of a type already becoming
familiar in newly independent African countries;2 and much was
made of the extraordinary pains that Olivier, anxious to avoid the
pitfalls of blackface caricature, had taken to imitate the actual
characteristics of black speech and body language. Olivier’s own
conception of the part, according to Kenneth Tynan’s documenta-
tion of the production, was of ‘a Negro sophisticated enough to
conform to the white myth about Negroes, pretending to be simple
and not above rolling his eyes, but in fact concealing (like any
other aristocrat) a highly developed sense of racial superiority’. For
Tynan this portrait of ‘a triumphant black despot, aﬂame with
unadmitted self-regard’ was entirely persuasive: ‘At the power of
his voice,’ the critic declared, ‘the windows shook and my scalp
tingled. A natural force had entered the room, stark and harsh,
with vowel-sounds as subtly alien as Kwame Nkrumah’s.’3 Where
Tynan had notoriously caricatured Orson Welles as ‘Citizen
Coon’,4 and Anthony Quayle had been mocked for his ‘gollywog-
style hair’,5 Olivier received widespread adulation for his ‘closely
studied . . . physical impersonation’ of a negro6—even though
opinions varied as to whether he had chosen his model from
Harlem,7 West Africa,8 or the Caribbean.9 According to Herbert
Kretzmer, Olivier ‘managed . . . to capture the very essence of
what it must mean to be born with a dark skin . . . Sir Laurence
embodies blackness’,10 whilst for Ronald Bryden ‘[h]e was the
[African] continent’.11 Once again the play’s capacity to erase

   1
      Harold Hobson, Sunday Times, 26 Apr. 1964.
   2
      Kenneth Tynan (ed.), ‘Othello’: The National Theatre Production (London,
1966; New York, 1967), pp. 4–5.
    3
      Tynan, pp. 4–5.
    4
      Evening Standard, 19 Oct. 1951.
    5
      Anonymous reviewer in The Stage, 18 Mar. 1954.
    6
      Tynan, p. 5.
    7
      See B. A. Young, Financial Times, 23 July 1964; Richard David, Shakespeare in
the Theatre (Cambridge, 1978), p. 466.
    8
      Hankey, p. 111.
    9
      Sanders, p. 47; Alan Brien, Sunday Telegraph (cited in Tynan, p. 104).
  10
      Daily Express, 22 Apr. 1964.
  11
      New Statesman, 1 May 1964.

                                        58
                                     Introduction

aesthetic distance seemed to have triumphed through the mes-
merizing power of an overwhelmingly ‘natural’ performance.
    Others were less impressed, however: Alan Seymour, who gen-
erally admired Olivier’s bravura playing, nevertheless admitted
that it could easily ‘be dismissed as dated, tasteless, and monstrous
with artistic, social and political offensiveness. Persons hypersensi-
tive to racial prejudice could make the charge that this eye-rolling,
pink-lipped, tongue-thrusting coal-black Pappy is a demonstration
of the most rearguard white man’s concept of the “primitive”
Negro.’1 For Alan Brien, indeed, this was ‘an impersonation which
might have seemed more convincing in the days when Negroes of
all shades and backgrounds were less commonly observed in Lon-
don streets. Now the combination of a Louis Armstrong guttural
voice and a Stepin Fetchit sway and shufﬂe appears rather perfunc-
tory.’2 Robert Kee’s response was even more hostile, ﬁnding in
Olivier’s coal-black face a caricature that ‘could only be a ﬁgment
of a white man’s imagination’, so that in his ‘worst moments [he
appeared] excruciatingly like something out of the Black and White
Minstrel Show’,3 while in the judgement of Fergus Cashin ‘too often
. . . he presented us with the ludicrous picture of Al Jolson in place
of the tortured Moor’.4
    The stereotypical exaggeration of Olivier’s Moor became even
more apparent when the performance was transferred to the
screen under the direction of Stuart Burge (1966): cinematic
close-up was as unforgiving to the theatricality of his studied
‘African/Caribbean’ mannerisms as it was to the smudge of
black make-up that appeared on the cheek of Maggie Smith’s
Desdemona; and within a decade it became difﬁcult for student
audiences to respond to the ﬁlm without embarrassment or laugh-
ter. In retrospect, then, Olivier’s Othello begins to look like an

  1
     ‘A View from the Stalls’, in Tynan, p. 13.
  2
     Tynan, p. 104.
  3
     Tynan, p. 106.
   4
     Daily Sketch, 22 Apr. 1964. At the same time Harold Hobson complained that
Dexter’s ‘strategy demands that [Frank Finlay’s] Iago should be thick-headed. The
dominating social and political fact today, as Arnold Toynbee has pointed out, is
that everywhere there is a revolt against the ideals and the faith of the white
races . . . in the light of this circumstance, and the theatre being what it is, it would be
unrealistic to expect that Iago, the persecutor of the blacks, should be shown as a
man of high, even if malicious intelligence’ (Sunday Times, 26 Apr. 1964; Tynan,
p. 105).

                                            59
                                 Introduction

epochal failure—one that, despite a scattered rearguard action in
the 1970s and early 1980s, seriously called in question the propri-
ety of white actors continuing to occupy the role they had played
since the time of Burbage.1 Yet, in its stage version at least, the per-
formance was a theatrical tour de force unmatched since Salvini,
or even Kean.
   In what was clearly a reaction against Olivier’s impersonation of
negritude, most Othellos of this period reverted to variations on
the orientalized Moor of the Victorians: Bruce Purchase (Mermaid,
1971) was ‘no more than fashionably sunburnt’,2 Brewster Mason
(RSC, 1971) played ‘a traditional, pre-Olivier Moor’,3 Donald
Sinden (RSC, 1979) became ‘a very light brown Othello’, made up
(by his own account) ‘to look like Nasser [the former military ruler
of Egypt] . . . with a beard’,4 Paul Scoﬁeld (National Theatre,
1980) chose ‘the light dusky tan of a desert ruler’ and a voice
marked by ‘Middle Eastern inﬂexions’,5 while Anthony Hopkins’s
television Moor resembled a ‘Hashemite warrior’ (1981).6 The
implications were not lost on reviewers: Sinden’s Othello per-
suaded Gareth Lloyd Evans that this was ‘not a play about colour
or racialism—certainly not in the modern sense. It is more of a
personal tragedy than a tribal disaster’;7 while Robert Cushman
recognized in Scoﬁeld’s self-absorbed performance a return to
‘the Eliot-Leavis view of the Moor: an egotist who deserves even
more than he gets’.8 Even the most intelligently political of these
productions, John Barton’s 1971 RSC Othello, with its nineteenth-
century colonial setting, convinced Jeremy Kingston ‘that the play
is more about differences in rank than differences of colour’, whilst
to Gareth Lloyd Evans it showed that ‘Othello’s “blackness” is not a
large issue in the play. . . . For an actor or director to worry away at

   1
     While Olivier’s mimicry of blackness is nowadays usually dismissed as
irredeemably racist, it is worth recalling that the great African-American actor,
James Earl Jones, who had given the ﬁrst of his seven Othellos in 1956, and who
profoundly disagreed with Olivier’s interpretation, nevertheless thought it a per-
formance that accurately revealed ‘all the paranoia, suspicions and defensiveness
of a victim of racism’ (cited in Potter, p. 147).
   2
     John Barber, Daily Telegraph, 17 Sept. 1971.
   3
     Ronald Bryden, Observer, 12 Sept. 1971.
   4
     B. A. Young, Financial Times, 8 Aug. 1979, 15 Aug. 1979.
   5
     Irving Wardle, Times, 24 Mar. 1980.
   6
     Pechter, p. 110.
   7
     Stratford Herald, 10 Aug. 1979.
   8
     Punch, 23 Mar. 1980.

                                       60
                                    Introduction

Othello’s colour is to confuse a detail for the whole.’1 Ronald
Bryden, agreeing that ‘Shakespeare’s tragedy isn’t really about
race’, saw Barton as trying ‘to free [the play] from the charge that
inevitably builds up around the image of a Negro marrying a white
woman’; in a production that deployed colonial images as a
template for explaining the social tensions of the play, Othello
emerged as ‘a black Englishman, a servant of Empire, of a kind
impossible before or since Victoria’, but, for Bryden, Mason’s
‘blackness [was] not, like Olivier’s, the emblem of a primitive,
African violence lurking in all of us’; instead it became ‘the symbol
of our difference, the otherness we fear in those we love’.2
   Some critics, however, were less than happy with this re-
orientalizing of the Moor. Reviewing Scoﬁeld’s Othello, Ian Stew-
art missed both the ‘sexual and racial tensions’ created by Olivier’s
stress on the hero’s blackness and the virtuosity with which he had
portrayed the heroic soldier’s terrifying ‘collapse into primitive
chaos’.3 Sheridan Morley was similarly dissatisﬁed with Sinden’s
over-civilized Arab, though it was not to Olivier’s theatricality but
to Robeson’s ‘natural’ aptitude for the role that he nostalgically
appealed:
What made Robeson [in 1959] so magical . . . was that by his very nature
he caught the mix of power and utter simplicity without which Othello
cannot be made plausible either as a play or as a role. Mr Sinden is simply
too clever and too gentle by half. . . . Othello does not need to become the
black-and-black minstrel that Olivier made of him, only a chorus away
from the Swanee River. He does, however, need to be capable of falling for
Iago’s duplicity. . . . [Sinden] is too light of heart rather than skin, too
ineffably sophisticated ever to get caught up with Bob Peck’s interesting
but none-too-subtle Iago.4

  1
     Punch, 22 Sept. 1971; Guardian, 17 Sept. 1971.
  2
     Ronald Bryden, Observer, 12 Sept. 1971. Despite the emphasis of most subse-
quent criticism, resistance to productions that stress the importance of race in the
play persists: thus Patrick Marmion criticized Christopher Geelan’s 2002 Cochrane
Theatre production for ‘hop[ing] to turn the play into a study of East–West tension,
institutionalized racism, gender conﬂict, and even class war’; while conceding that
‘there is much in the text to justify these themes, he argued that ‘Geelan’s modern-
dress staging is still more convincing as a traditional tale of spite, gullibility, inno-
cence and green-eyed rage’ (Evening Standard, 7 Feb. 2002).
   3
     Country Life, 17 Apr. 1980.
   4
     Punch, 22 Aug. 1979. Given Robeson’s formidable academic history it is difﬁcult
not to detect a racial assumption behind Morley’s emphasis on the actor’s natural
‘simplicity’ and want of sophistication.

                                          61
                                 Introduction

   The clear implication of Morley’s criticisms was that only a
black actor could fully inhabit the part; and to that extent he
was prophetic, since in the two succeeding decades white Othellos
would become rare enough to provoke charges of reverse racism in
the British theatre. The only notable exception was Ben Kingsley’s
North African Moor in Terry Hands’s 1985 production for the RSC.
Irving Wardle praised Hands’s decision to ‘restore [the hero] to
Islam’, thereby abandoning ‘the always defeated attempt to trace
racial themes in this play, and root[ing] it much more proﬁtably in
a collision of culture’.1 But even Kingsley—though he seems to
have been more interested in exploring the homoerotic intensity of
Othello’s relationship with Iago than in the play’s racial dimen-
sion2—was at pains to establish a special authenticity for his
performance by invoking his half-Indian parentage and claiming
inspiration from the Moroccans amongst whom he had been ﬁlm-
ing when asked to take the role.3 The resulting performance, while
it seemed too close to the actor’s recent cinematic Gandhi for the
taste of some reviewers,4 was saluted by Michael Coveney as ‘the
most genuinely ethnic Othello since Olivier’.5
   However questionable this judgement of Olivier’s ethnic authen-
ticity may now seem, Dexter’s production was nevertheless impor-
tant as an attempt to rethink the play in relation to contemporary
race politics: coinciding not only with the beginning of African
decolonization, but with the climactic phase of the Civil Rights
struggle in America, and with the consequent spread of négritude
and Black Power philosophies, the production spoke to the social
strains as well as to the idealism generated by this period of his-
tory. Dexter’s theatrical reinvestigation of Othello’s blackness was
matched by the work of a small group of critics—G. M. Matthews,
Eldred Durosimi Jones, and G. K. Hunter—who took the ﬁrst
steps towards a systematic and fully historicized exploration of


  1
     The Times, 25 Sept. 1985.
  2
     Observer Colour Magazine, 22 Sept. 1985.
   3
     Interview in The Times, 21 Sept. 1985; see also Potter, pp. 164–5.
   4
     Unable to resist paraphrasing Winston Churchill’s notorious sneer at the In-
dian leader as ‘a half-naked fakir’, John Barber complained of Kingsley’s ‘curious
Fakir’s choked back emotion’ (Daily Telegraph, 26 Sept. 1985), whilst Francis King
grumbled that in the last scenes he looked ‘more like some sex-maddened fakir than
a respected military ofﬁcer’ (Sunday Telegraph, 29 Sept. 1985).
   5
     Financial Times, 26 Sept. 1985.

                                       62
                                  Introduction

Shakespeare’s treatment of race.1 It was not, however, for another
two decades that the directions charted in the mid 1960s were to be
pursued by a new generation of critics and theatre practitioners.
   For all the lofty dismissiveness of reviewers like Wardle, Lloyd
Evans, and Bryden, who had insisted on the ultimate irrelevance
of colour to the tragedy, Othello in the late 1980s and 1990s would
become a play saturated with racial anxiety. More than anything,
perhaps, it was the prominence given to racial issues by the gather-
ing crisis in apartheid South Africa that prompted a renewed focus
on the signiﬁcance of Othello’s blackness; and it was the deliberate
political appropriation of the play by two South Africans, one a
Shakespeare scholar, the other an actor and director, that marked
the decisive turning-point. The 1987 publication of Martin Orkin’s
essay ‘Othello and the “Plain Face” of Racism’ (whose activist
agenda was announced by the title of the book in which it was
reprinted, Shakespeare Against Apartheid2) coincided with Janet Suz-
man’s deﬁantly multi-racial production at the Market Theatre in
Johannesburg, with the prominent Xhosa actor John Kani in the
title role. For his performance Kani was adorned with a heavy
necklet, a piece of barbaric jewellery that disconcertingly resem-
bled a slave-collar, and from which hung the small knife with
which he would ultimately kill himself. The importance of Othello,
for the makers of this production as much as for Orkin, lay in its
transhistorical immediacy; thus there was no more appropriate
work, Suzman and Kani believed, ‘to describe the utter tragedy of
our country. . . . The play addresses the notion of apartheid four
hundred years before the epithet was coined—and rejects it.’3
Introducing the television version of her production, Suzman


   1
     Matthews, ‘Othello and the Dignity of Man’, in Arnold Kettle (ed.), Shakespeare
in a Changing World (1964), 123–45; Jones, Othello’s Countrymen: The African in Eng-
lish Renaissance Drama (1965); Hunter, ‘Othello and Colour Prejudice’.
   2
     Martin Orkin, ‘Othello and the “Plain Face” of Racism’, SQ 38 (1987), 166–8; in
Shakespeare Against Apartheid (Craighall, South Africa, 1987). The only important
essay to engage with the play’s racial dimension in the years between Hunter’s
British Academy Lecture and Orkin’s essay—Doris Adler’s ‘The Rhetoric of Black
and White in Othello’, SQ 25 (1974), 248–57, published in the year of the Soweto
uprising in South Africa—grew out of the author’s experience as a white teacher of
black students at Howard University in 1969 at the height of the Black Power move-
ment (p. 248).
   3
     Janet Suzman, introducing ‘Othello in Johannesburg’, Channel 4 Television,
1988.

                                        63
                                Introduction

described Iago as ‘operat[ing] like your local bigot, seemingly
decent on the surface, boorish and quite without compassion
underneath’, at which point she cut between a clip of Richard
Haddon Haines’s bullying, hate-ﬁlled Iago to the ranting oratory of
Eugene Terreblanche, leader of the neo-fascist AWB, the extremist
Afrikaner organization that rose to prominence in the last years of
apartheid. Although this production was also sympathetic to the
predicament of the female characters, stressing Emilia’s victimiza-
tion by Iago, its priorities were made clear when the dying Emilia,
in a mute repudiation of her earlier racial slurs, reached out her
hand for Othello—rather than for Desdemona (as she would do in
Trevor Nunn’s woman-centred RSC Othello two years later).
   Suzman’s Othello achieved a wide international currency
through television and videotape; and the urgency of John Kani’s
performance as the Moor, together with the director’s insistence on
the work’s contemporary relevance, contributed to the grow-
ing politicization of the play outside South Africa—especially in
Britain, where the emergence of a cadre of classically trained black
actors had begun to make the propriety of continuing to cast white
actors in the role of Othello a matter of controversy. Starting with
the appearance of Joseph Marcell and Rudolph Walker, at the
Hammersmith Lyric Studio and Young Vic in 1984, a succession
of black Othellos—including Clarke Peters (Greenwich, 1989),
Willard White (RSC, The Other Place, 1989), Ben Thomas (Talawa
Theatre Company, 1997), David Harewood (National, Lyttelton
Theatre, 1997), Ray Fearon (RST, 1999), and Nicholas Monu
(Cochrane Theatre, 2002)—took virtual possession of the role.
Already by 1989, when Trevor Nunn cast Willard White in the lead
for openly ‘political reasons’, Michael Billington had begun to
believe that it might be impossible for the role any longer to be given
to a white actor—even though he felt that ‘the last truly earth-
shaking Othello was Olivier a quarter of a century ago’.1 An ironic
consequence of the overwhelming pressure to cast only black Oth-
ellos was a risk-averse strategy that kept the play off the main
stages for nearly a decade after Nunn’s production. Signiﬁcantly,
when the British actor Patrick Stewart was offered the lead by the
Washington Shakespeare Company in 1997, he would agree to take

  1
    Nunn, quoted in Barbara Hodgdon, The Shakespeare Trade: Performances and
Appropriations (Philadelphia, 1998), p. 50; Billington, Guardian, 26 Aug. 1989.

                                      64
                                   Introduction

it only in a so-called ‘photo-negative’ production, in which a white
Othello faced an entirely black world; and when in the same year
the play at last returned to London, the National’s choice of the
youthful David Harewood provoked a ﬂurry of complaint about
‘political correctness’. Reviewers pointed to the convention of
colour-neutral casting now operating elsewhere in the theatre, and
sourly observed that no such racial sanctions appeared to operate
in the casting of Verdi’s opera, where Placido Domingo reigned
supreme in the title role.1 Blaming an overreaction both to the
offensiveness of the minstrel tradition and to the grossness of Olivi-
er’s impersonation, Geoffrey Wheatcroft urged white actors to
challenge the ‘odious notion [of black-only casting] by demanding
to play Othello—blacked up or au naturel as the theatre pleases’; if
refused, they should sue under the Race Relations Act.2
    Harewood himself responded angrily to such criticisms, insisting
that ‘it is now ridiculous to see a white person blacked up’, and
arguing (like Robeson) that the play had given him ‘a grounding in
black consciousness. . . . That’s where Othello has helped me, I’m
not playing—I’m being.’3 As Harewood’s comments imply, the pol-
itics of black casting had a number of strands: it was a reaction to
the perceived offensiveness of ‘blacking-up’—a convention that
was seen as inextricably compromised by ‘nigger-minstrel’ racism;
it answered to the belief, apparent from Aldridge’s time onwards,
that a black actor’s ‘natural’ sympathy with the part must lend his
performance an authenticity transcending mere art; and it was a
natural corollary of the desire to make the play speak to contem-
porary racial issues. Thus the critic Richard Wilson supplied a pro-
gramme note for David Thacker’s 1984 Young Vic production in
which he promoted Othello as ‘Shakespeare’s most topical tragedy
. . . his most prophetic analysis of the psychology of colonialism
and power.’ The key to understanding the play, Wilson argued, lies
in the fact that ‘Othello is a freed slave. He prides himself on
his “free condition” and his “free and open nature”. Liberated
from the chain-gang, he imagines that “All slaves are free”. . . .

   1
     See Alistair Macaulay, Financial Times, 18 Sept. 1997; John Gross, Sunday Tele-
graph, 21 Sept. 1997; Charles Spencer, Telegraph, 18 Sept. 1997; David Lister, ‘Can it
be wrong to “black up” for Othello?’, Independent, 7 Aug. 1997.
   2
     Geoffrey Wheatcroft, ‘Sorry, sweetheart, but whites need not apply’, Sunday
Telegraph, 21 Sept. 1997.
   3
     Independent, 12 May 1998.

                                         65
                                    Introduction

Othello’s “free and noble nature” is as oppressed in this “free” soci-
ety as when he was a galley slave. . . . bound by the invisible chain
of words and images. . . . Othello is a tragedy based on the crudest
race myth, the legend of the negro’s sexual danger.’
   Wilson’s insistence on the play’s ‘prophetic’ character, re-
inforced by his anachronistic reference to the chain-gangs of segre-
gationist America and to a Fanonian ‘psychology of colonialism’
with its attendant sexual fantasies, ﬁrmly relocated the play in the
context of twentieth-century racial politics. Rather more oblique in
its approach was Trevor Nunn’s small-scale RSC production at The
Other Place in 1989—subsequently televised and issued on video
by the BBC. Making use of a device borrowed from John Barton’s
1971 production, and later copied by both Sam Mendes (National
Theatre, 1997) and Michael Attenborough (RSC, 1999), Nunn
transferred the action to a setting evocative of ‘the Edwardian
sunset of colonial power and moral certainties’.1 This created a con-
text in which the racial bigotry of Iago, Roderigo, and Brabantio
became readily explicable to a modern audience, whilst allowing
them the comfort of a certain historical distance. By choosing the
black Marsha Hunt to play Bianca, Nunn also contrived to suggest
that Othello’s jealous insecurities had something in common with
those of this other mercenary outsider.2 But, although Willard
White was widely publicized as the ﬁrst black actor to play Othello in
the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company, the bravura of Ian
McKellen’s riveting Iago so overwhelmed the digniﬁed restraint of
White’s Moor that the play became more a study of psychopathic
villainy than of racial conﬂict. Moreover, the domestic scale of
Nunn’s production, which minimized the signiﬁcance of the play’s
larger framework of Christian–Islamic conﬂict, tended, by its focus
on ‘the inner world of husbands and wives’, to make gender seem
more important than race.3
   Ironically enough, in Jude Kelly’s 1997 Washington Shakespeare
Company Othello, Patrick Stewart’s politically tactful insistence on

   1
     Jack Tinker, Daily Mail, 26 Aug. 1989. Mendes, however, updated the colonial
setting to the 1930s, suggesting an additional fascist context for Iago’s racism.
   2
     Nunn seems to have initiated a fashion for casting black actresses in this role,
especially in the United States, thereby turning this character into ‘Othello’s foil, a
sign of how far Othello has travelled and how far he can fall, a sign of the limits that
race draws around individuals’ (Iyengar in Kolin, p. 111).
   3
     Vaughan, p. 218; and see below, pp. 106–9.

                                          66
                                  Introduction

photo-negative casting resulted in an even more absolute neutral-
ization of the play’s racial theme. Although Kelly herself was less
interested in what the play had to say about race than in its treat-
ment of gender issues, Miranda Johnson-Haddad’s programme
note, invoking apartheid South Africa and the alleged murder of
his white wife by the black American sporting hero O. J. Simpson,
invited audiences to see the play as Shakespeare’s exploration of
‘the social context that enables racism . . . to develop’; and the pro-
duction carefully located its white Moor in an inverted hierarchy of
colour that placed olive-skinned Cypriots somewhere between the
black elite and a white serving class. Helped by the barbaric tattoos
on Stewart’s arms and shaven head, audiences adjusted readily
enough to the reversed valencies of black and white. However,
Iago’s repertory of racial insults necessarily lost most of its power
to wound when aimed at a conspicuously white hero;1 and signiﬁ-
cantly, the only moments in the production with a dangerous
racial charge were those that ran counter to the economy of insult
in the text itself—as for example when Othello’s reference to ‘the
Cannibals that each other eat, | The Anthropophagi’ (1.3.143–4)
became a sardonic challenge to the (black) Venetian Senate. In this
respect Stewart’s ‘appealing, articulate’ Moor did not help: not
only did he appear, when set against Ron Canada’s rather stolid
Iago, ‘almost too intelligent’ to make the plot persuasive, but his air
of humorously relaxed self-conﬁdence ﬁtted so easily with a certain
stereotype of white authority that reviewers found it ‘hard to feel
particularly sorry for him’.2 Indeed, when combined with Kelly’s
stress on gender politics, colour reversal lent a peculiar force to
the ‘brothel’ scene, where Stewart’s physical abuse of Patrice
Johnson’s Desdemona, mingling fury with desire, recalled the
‘primal scene’ of American racial history—the violent rape of
black women by white men.3
   1
     See e.g. Lloyd Rose, Washington Post, 18 Nov. 1997; Nelson Pressley,
Washington Times, 18 Nov. 1997; Peter Marks, New York Times, 21 Nov. 1997; Bob
Mondello, Washington City Paper, 21 Nov. 1997.
   2
     See Mondello and Marks, 21 Nov. 1997.
   3
     See Denise Albanese, ‘Black and White, and Dread All Over: The Shakespeare
Theater’s “Photonegative Othello” and the Body of Desdemona’, in Dympna
Callaghan (ed.), A Feminist Companion to Shakespeare (Oxford, 2003), 226–47
(p. 241). Albanese’s detailed critique of the production attacks the implicit racial
politics of its casting, which it sees as ‘a parody of afﬁrmative action’ designed
to neutralize the play’s ‘unpalatable propositions’ in the interests of ‘preserving
an aestheticized and performatively innocuous Shakespeare’ (p. 243).

                                        67
                                    Introduction

   By contrast, Yvonne Brewster’s production for the black Talawa
Theatre Company in the same year used a recent scandal in the
United States to insist on the immediacy and centrality of Othello’s
racial predicament. The 1994 arrest of the African American foot-
ball hero O. J. Simpson on suspicion of murdering his white wife had
provoked numerous comparisons with Shakespeare’s play1—to the
point where, in a somewhat hyperbolic comparison, Barbara
Hodgdon maintains that ‘[m]uch as the Holocaust . . . altered for-
ever the meanings of Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice, the Simpson
trial . . . made Othello the timeliest of Shakespeare’s plays’.2 The
Talawa programme featured an essay entitled ‘Orenthal and
Othello’, by the Barbadian novelist Austin Clark, pursuing the par-
allels between Simpson and Othello as black men whose success in
mastering the white world, epitomized by their acquisition of white
wives, exposed them to racial backlash. According to Clark, the par-
allels between the two cases, each of which exposed white society’s
‘psychosexual obsession with black men who lie in bed with white
women’, demonstrated that ‘racism has an enduring nature, and is
perennially ﬁxed in our consciousness and in our blood’:
Nothing has changed. Nothing can. [OJ’s] invisibility . . . is now stripped
away; the ﬂesh of racism is added, to make him into a savage, brutish man,
a black who hid his oppositeness beneath a façade of whiteness. He
achieved his white destiny, but he still retained that aspect of his charac-
ter. The General on the other hand, is deﬁned even in the heyday of his
municipal success, also in terms of the beast.
In the same vein, a number of reviewers responded to Oliver
Parker’s 1995 ﬁlm of Othello as though it were a self-conscious
meta-commentary on the scandal—a reading reinforced by the
casting of Laurence Fishburne, most recently seen as the wife-
beating Ike Turner in What’s Love Got To Do With It, as Othello.3
  1
     See, for instance, Hodgdon, Shakespeare Trade, pp. 39–41, 59–64; and James A.
McPherson, ‘Three Great Ones of the City and One Perfect Soul: Well Met at Cyprus’,
in Kaul, pp. 45–76. That the supposed parallels also impressed some more ordinary
American theatregoers was indicated by an exchange of grafﬁti that appeared in the
lavatories of the Folger Shakespeare Theatre at the time of the trial: ‘Hey, OJ, at least
Othello was sorry for what he did.’ ‘Yeah, and he killed himself too.’
   2
     Hodgdon, Shakespeare Trade, p. 72.
   3
     See Potter, p. 193, and Joyce Green MacDonald, ‘Black Ram, White Ewe: Shake-
speare, Race, and Women’, in Callaghan (ed.), Feminist Companion to Shakespeare,
188–207 (p. 189). For a detailed analysis of Parker’s ﬁlm (in which Kenneth
Branagh also gave particular emphasis to the violent misogyny of Iago) as ‘the per-
fect post-O.J. Othello’, see Hodgdon, pp. 64–73.

                                          68
                                  Introduction

   One danger with productions that seek such immediacy is that
through their choice of familiarizing detail they can sometimes
reinforce the very stereotypes they seek to combat. This seems
to have happened in Michael Boyd’s 1984 Othello at the Lyric
Studio, Hammersmith: invoking the late-Victorian essentialism of
Joseph Conrad, Christopher Edwards described Joseph Marcell’s
Sandhurst-educated African as ‘retreat[ing] to the heart of dark-
ness’ when, succumbing to Iago’s temptations, he heard ‘bongo
drums and jungle rhythms’, and then re-entered ‘with chicken
feathers in his hair’ as if coming from ‘a voodoo sacriﬁce’.1 A more
successful version of essentially the same device was employed
in Cathy Downes’s 2001 production for the Court Theatre in
Christchurch, New Zealand. Here the action was translated to the
nineteenth-century land wars along the Waikato river; Othello
was a missionary-adopted, British-educated general leading the
British forces against his own people; while ‘Cyprus’ was the name
of his gunboat headquarters. At the climax of his jealous disinte-
gration, the ‘careful mantle of civilisation slip[ped]’ and Othello
burst into the terrifying wero (warrior’s challenge) that announced
his imminent revenge.2 But where the postcolonial politics of New
Zealand allowed this to be read as a proper repudiation of the colo-
nizer’s values, the Hammersmith bongo drums merely invoked the
crudest of racial stereotypes.
   It was partly in order to counter the persistent ‘view that Othello
behaves as he does because of his race’ that the 1989 Greenwich
production, co-directed by Sue Dunderdale and the black actor
Hugh Quarshie, matched its black Othello with a black Iago:
as Quarshie’s programme note explained, Cyprus with its ‘olive-
skinned natives’ was to be seen as a ‘colonial’ society governed by a
deeply internalized hierarchy of colour in which Iago’s inﬂuence
over the hero was determined partly by the relative lightness of
his skin. A decade later, however, Quarshie had come to question
whether the play was really amenable to the kind of reading that
he and Dunderdale had attempted. Where in 1989 he had insisted
that an authentic performance required that Othello be ‘a black

   1
      Christopher Edwards, Spectator, 29 Sept. 1984; and cf. Michael Coveney, Finan-
cial Times, 19 Sept. 1984.
   2
      John Smythe, National Business Review, 15 June 2001; Faith Oxenbridge,
Listener, 19 May 2001; Juliet Neill, Theatre News, June/July 2001.

                                        69
                                   Introduction

man, and not someone impersonating a black man’, now, in a lec-
ture entitled ‘Hesitations on Othello’,1 he argued that ‘being a black
actor gives . . . no greater insight into . . . the play, than being
Danish would into Hamlet’ (p. 3). Going further, he even specu-
lated that since this was ‘a role written for a white actor in black
make-up and for a . . . white audience . . . Of all the parts in the
canon, perhaps Othello is the one which should most deﬁnitely not
be played by a black actor’; after all, ‘if a black actor plays a role
written for a white actor does he not risk making racial stereotypes
seem legitimate and even true . . . does he not encourage the white
way, or rather the wrong way, of looking at black men, namely
that [they] are over-emotional, excitable and unstable’ (p. 5).2 With
some reluctance, Quarshie conceded that in order to challenge ‘the
racist conventions that have persisted for so long’ black actors
should continue to play the part—especially since, by combining ‘a
radical re-reading of key passages’ with ‘some judicious cutting
and textual emendation’, it might yet be possible to produce ‘a
non-racist interpretation’ of what he had come to think of as a
fundamentally racist play.3 In the ﬁrst version of his lecture, how-
ever, Quarshie had cited the view of the African ﬁlm-maker
Onyekachi Wambu that ‘black actors [should] renounce [their]
effective monopoly of the role and encourage white actors in black
make-up to . . . expose the absurdity of this grotesque fantasy’;4

  1
     Quarshie’s lecture was ﬁrst delivered as the Shakespeare Birthday Lecture in
Stratford-upon-Avon, in 1998 and then (in a substantially revised form) as the ﬁrst
of the 1998/9 Hudson Strode Lectures at the University of Alabama. It was this lat-
ter version that formed the basis of Second Thoughts about ‘Othello’ (see above, p. 5,
n. 4).
   2
     Compare Marks’s suggestion (pp. 116–17) that ‘the tricky combination of
“strangeness” and “kinship” [needed for the part] is best achieved not by a black
actor, someone who is likely to imagine for Othello a subjectivity formed of the par-
ticular experiences of a black man, but an actor in what could usefully be called
“racial drag”. . . . A real black actor . . . has too much independent selfhood getting
in the way.’
   3
     Second Thoughts, pp. 20, 21, 3, 7. Some of Quarshie’s arguments had been
anticipated in a sophisticated essay by Dympna Callaghan, ‘ “Othello was a White
Man”: Properties of Race on Shakespeare’s Stage’, in Terence Hawkes (ed.), Alter-
native Shakespeares, vol. 2 (1996), pp. 192–215, which explores the implications of
the role’s having been written for a white actor.
   4
     I am indebted to Robert Smallwood for supplying me with a typescript of the
Stratford version. Potter (p. 175) cites a similar response from the Nigerian critic
S. E. Ogude: ‘[a] black Othello is an obscenity. The element of the grotesque is
best achieved when a white man plays the role.’ However blinkered by current racial

                                         70
                                   Introduction

and just such a satiric travesty, in which the play would once again
become ‘a minstrel show . . . played for laughs’ and its protagonist
a ‘caricature’ in blackface, has been proposed by the black
American director Sheila Rose Bland as the version best calculated
to expose the racist intentions of a playwright who (she wryly sug-
gests) can never have expected his play to be taken seriously as a
tragedy.1

Othello and Iago When in 1623 Leonard Digges (almost as though
proposing an alternative title for the tragedy) wrote of ‘Honest
Iago, or the Jealous Moor’, he was already acknowledging the
villain’s propensity to compete for the dominant position in the
drama.2 Yet it is surely signiﬁcant that no major tragic actor before
Sir Henry Irving at the end of the nineteenth century elected to risk
his reputation by choosing to play Iago in preference to Othello—
though a number had essayed both roles.3 By the beginning of the
twentieth century, however, the playwright Herman Charles
Merivale could conﬁdently declare that ‘rightly played’ Iago must
emerge as the true centre of the tragedy.4 Merivale’s claim would
probably have seemed inconceivable to Henry Jackson, whose
note on the 1610 Oxford performance does not even mention the
villain; and for most early viewers it appears to have been the
Othello of Richard Burbage, the great tragedian of Shakespeare’s
company, that dominated the performance. His, according to an
anonymous elegiast in 1618, was ‘the chiefest part, | Wherein,



politics such responses may appear to be, a disconcerting light is thrown on the
play’s capacity to mobilize racial fantasy by a succession of ﬁlms in which the cen-
tral character, a white actor cast as Othello is possessed by murderous jealousy
whilst playing the role (see p. 9).
   1
     Sheila Rose Bland, ‘How I would Direct Othello’, in Kaul, pp. 29–41. C. Bernard
Jackson’s Iago (see ‘Reception’, above, p. 13, n. 3)—a retelling of the story from the
point of view of a black Emilia—concludes with the killing of an author ﬁgure
named ‘William’—a symbolic revenge, as Lois Potter notes (p. 171), on Shakespeare
himself.
   2
     See Pechter, pp. 25–6. Digges’s verses appeared in the 1640 edition of Shake-
speare’s Poems, but seem to have originally been intended for the First Folio.
   3
     Hankey, p. 30. Charles Macklin, known as the greatest Shylock of his time, is
a partial exception; but he was physically unsuited to heroic roles—see Hankey,
pp. 39–40; Rosenberg, pp. 40–1.
   4
     Herman Charles Merivale, Bar, Stage, and Platform; Autobiographic Memories
(1902), p. 149, cited in Hankey, p. 92.

                                         71
                                     Introduction

beyond the rest, he moved the heart’.1 By contrast, nothing is
known of the earliest Iago, save that (according to the Restoration
writer Charles Gildon) he ‘was in much esteem as a comedian’.2
Such a casting was perhaps predictable, given that Shakespeare’s
conception of the role (as Bernard Spivack3 has shown) clearly
owed a good deal to the Vice of medieval Morality drama—the ﬁg-
ure whose demonic humour spawned the gleeful wickedness of
Richard III and Marlowe’s Barabas, as well as the more genial iniq-
uity of Falstaff. ‘Jocularity’, Spivack has declared, ‘is the true pas-
sion of [Iago]’, whose ‘emotions are simply variations on the
monolithic passion of laughter. He is a creature of leaping jubila-
tion and sardonic mirth’ (pp. 17–18); and even though the role was
sometimes taken by actors noted for their prowess in tragedy,
including Joseph Taylor (best known as Burbage’s successor in the
role of Hamlet),4 most interpretations seem to have retained a
comic accent until the nineteenth century. Samuel Sandford, the
most prominent Restoration Iago, was notorious for the extrava-
gantly melodramatic style apparently encouraged by what his suc-
cessor, Colley Cibber, described as his ‘low and crooked person’.5
Best known as a comic actor, Cibber offered an Iago whose ludi-
crously exaggerated combination of fop and villain drove one critic
to complain that ‘Othello must be supposed a fool, a stock if he does
not see through him.’6 Though criticized at the time, Cibber’s
pantomime approach seems to have set the tone for numerous

   1
     Quoted in Furness, p. 396. The manuscript in which the elegy is preserved is
possibly suspect, since it was discovered by J. P. Collier, notorious for his forgeries of
Shakespearian documents.
   2
     Hankey, p. 18; some scholars have suggested that the comedian may have been
Armin, famous for his melancholy clowns; but a more likely possibility is
John Lowin, who probably played Falstaff, as well as Sir Epicure Mammon in The
Alchemist and Bosola in The Duchess of Malﬁ. Lowin, who was 28 in 1604, was the
right age for the part—see Potter, p. 3.
   3
     Spivack, esp. chaps. 1, 2, and 12. Spivack’s vivid account of Iago’s ‘hybrid’
characterization as a conventional Vice ﬁgure, wedded to malice by his diabolical
nature, but disguised with a thin overlay of psychological naturalism, remains one
of the best things on the play; but (as will be apparent elsewhere) I think he under-
estimates the extent to which Shakespeare’s psychological insight succeeds in trans-
forming the type.
   4
     Hankey, pp. 18–19.
   5
     Colley Cibber, An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber, [1740], ed. B. R. S. Fone
(Ann Arbor, 1968), p. 77, cited in Hankey, p. 30.
   6
     Gentleman’s Magazine, Nov. 1734, cited in Rosenberg, p. 47; see also John Den-
nis’s comments, cited in Potter, pp. 71–2.

                                           72
                                Introduction




      11. ‘A gay, light-hearted monster’: Edmund Kean as Iago (1814).

eighteenth-century Iagos, despite the moderating inﬂuence of
Macklin, Garrick, and Kemble.1 Even the great Edmund Kean
(ﬁg. 11) made of him, according to Hazlitt, ‘a gay, light-hearted
monster’.2
   It comes as a shock now to ﬁnd Charles Gildon in 1694 citing
Iago’s ‘old black ram’ tirade as an example of language that Shake-
speare had included in the part ‘to make the audience laugh’.3
That assessment may reveal more about the notorious levity of
Restoration playhouses than about the dramatist’s intentions;
nevertheless it remains the case that, just as part of the genius of
the play’s design lies in the daring with which it yokes together
comic and tragic conventions, so the opposition of Othello and Iago
  1
     See Rosenberg, pp. 49–50.
  2
     Morning Chronicle, 9 May 1814, cited in Rosenberg, p. 122; cf. also Hankey,
pp. 53–5.
  3
     Cited in Hankey, p. 12.

                                      73
                                   Introduction

develops much of its theatrical power from a clash of histrionic
styles. Thus while the part of Othello is conceived in the lofty,
magniloquent idiom of heroic tragedy,1 it is repeatedly exposed to
question by its juxtaposition with the prosaic naturalism and sar-
donic humour of Iago, for whom the Moor’s richly ornamented
language amounts to nothing more than ‘a bombast circumstance
| Horribly stuffed with epithets of war’ (1.1.12–13). Iago’s judge-
ment is uncomfortably mirrored in the dismissive responses of
such twentieth-century critics as T. S. Eliot, with his infamous
assertion that Othello in his last great aria is merely ‘cheering
himself up’, and F. R. Leavis, for whom Othello is an egotist who
conceals his innate savagery with self-dramatizing bombast.2 The
danger presented by any Iago who overplays the comic opportuni-
ties of the role is that he will succeed in making his Othello appear
a credulous fool unworthy of the audience’s sympathy; and per-
haps it was partly Rymer’s experience of the Sandford Iago (even
though it was matched with Betterton’s mighty Othello) that per-
suaded him to take such a negative view of the play.
   In the nineteenth century, following the lead of William Charles
Macready, who stressed the ‘ﬁendish subtlety’ with which Iago
makes a puppet of his victim, the part was given a more intellec-
tual cast. Not only did this make it more attractive to leading trage-
dians, in many cases it also seems to have enabled a better balance
between the two roles. The effect was often to turn the Othello–Iago
pairing, which John Philip Kemble and George Frederick Cooke
(1803–4) had already made highly competitive, into a contest of
virtuosity (rather like the soprano duels of baroque opera) in which
the sense of ﬁerce rivalry between two popular actors added to the
excitement of the dramatic conﬂict.3 So it became common to
describe the struggle between Iago and Othello in terms of a com-
petition for acting honours.4 Some performances, indeed, were


  1
    On heroic character and style, see Eugene M. Waith, Ideas of Greatness: Heroic
Drama in England (1971).
  2
    T. S. Eliot, ‘Shakespeare and the Stoicism of Seneca’, in Selected Essays (1951),
126–40 (esp. pp. 129–31); F. R. Leavis, ‘Diabolic Intellect and the Noble Hero’,
Scrutiny, 6 (1937), 259–83, repr. in The Common Pursuit (1952; repr.
Harmondsworth, 1969), 136–59.
  3
    See Potter, pp. 76–85.
  4
    See, for example, the Stratford Herald’s review of Benson and Rodney, 30 Apr.
1897; the Birmingham Post’s review of the same pair, 16 Apr. 1902.

                                        74
                                    Introduction

deliberately set up in this way: thus in 1816 Macready and Charles
Young alternated the roles in a fashion that deliberately advertised
their friendly rivalry. Following their lead a year later, Edmund
Kean faced out an emerging competitor, Junius Brutus Booth, in
what was described as a ‘wrestle of talent’, by inviting him to play
Iago to his own powerful Othello. Kean set about ‘smothering’
Booth’s performance and succeeded in ‘beat[ing] his antagonist
hollow’, as The Champion put it—a stunt which he managed once
again in the last year of his life when, despite failing health, he suc-
cessfully outpointed the menacingly intellectual ensign of his bitter
rival Macready (1833).1
   The egotistical Macready himself alternated the parts in this
‘terrible duel between brain and heart’ with the luckless George
Vandenhoff in such a fashion as to make his own Iago the supreme
puppet-master of the action, whilst when the roles were reversed
his partner was reduced to a mere ‘stoker’ of Othello’s emotions.2
Henry Irving and the American Edwin Booth (Junius Brutus’s son)
engaged in a more amicable exchange of the leading roles at the
Lyceum in 1881. Both were reckoned stronger as Iago. Booth’s
‘Byronic Moor’ was the more successful of the two Othellos, prov-
ing (despite his conspicuous emotional restraint3) a surprisingly
effective match for Irving’s Iago, a mischievous bullﬁghter4 whose
veneer of gaiety only deepened the force of his secret malice. But in
the end even the digniﬁed anguish of Booth’s ‘noble savage’ tended
to be outshone by his rival’s brilliant touches of invention—as
when in Act 1, for example, Irving plucked and slowly devoured a
bunch of grapes, ‘spitting out the seeds, as if each one represented
a virtue to be put out of his mouth’, or when in Act 5 he ‘turn[ed]
over with his foot, in indolent and mocking curiosity, the body of
Roderigo, to see if life were extinct’.5
  1
      Potter, pp. 77–8; Hankey, pp. 60–1; Vaughan, pp. 139–40.
  2
      George Vandenhoff, Leaves from an Actor’s Notebook (1860), pp. 208–9, cited in
Potter, p. 78.
   3
      See Hankey, pp. 85–6; Rosenberg, pp. 79, 82, 126–8; Potter, pp. 40–2. For
Booth, Othello’s character showed not the slightest trace of ‘animalism’ or ‘bestial-
ity’: ‘to my mind he is pure and noble, even in his rage’ (letter of 15 Feb. 1881, cited
in Hankey, p. 85).
   4
      The metaphor was Irving’s own: ‘To me [Iago] has . . . a slight dash of the bull-
ﬁghter, and during the brawl between Cassio and Montano, I used to enjoy ﬂicking
at them with a red cloak, as though they were mere bulls in the arena’ (cited in
Rosenberg, p. 127).
   5
      Athenaeum (7 May 1881); Ellen Terry, The Story of My Life (1908), p. 32.

                                          75
                                  Introduction




   12. ‘Glittering, hellish, self-centred strength’: Edwin Booth as Iago.


   By contrast, Irving’s ‘plaintive and lachrymose’ Moor, whose
attempts at heroic passion made him resemble ‘an infuriated
sepoy’, was so comprehensively upstaged by Booth’s calmly plaus-
ible Iago (ﬁg. 12), with his cold intelligence and ‘glittering, hellish,
self-centred strength’, that Irving ended the season vowing never
to play the lead again.1 Even if Booth’s Iago was by now a little old-
fashioned, there was nothing in his rival’s Othello to match
the famous coup de théâtre after the Moor’s suicide, in which Iago,
‘brought down the ﬁnal curtain, standing over Othello, pointing
triumphantly at the dead body, and gazing up at the gallery with a


   1
     William Winter, The Life and Art of Edwin Booth (1893), pp. 181–2, in Hankey,
p. 94; Athenaeum (19 Feb. 1876), in Rosenberg, pp. 77 and p. 79. Although Booth’s
was clearly a more sober Iago than Irving’s, he too believed that a comic touch was
needed for the part (Potter, p. 81).

                                        76
                                   Introduction

malignant smile’.1 ‘Had the play been acted before the Borgias’,
wrote an American reviewer, responding to a later Booth perform-
ance of the role, ‘they would have looked on Othello as a stupid
brute deserving not even pity, and Iago would have appealed to
them as a hero. To the aesthetic sense of today . . . Iago, when per-
fectly interpreted, as only Booth can do it, is the richest intellectual
(as distinct from emotional) treat in the literature of the drama.’2
   The reviewer’s anxiety about the extent of Booth’s power over
the audience was evident in his effort to displace his own response
on to the machiavellian Borgias. But the perception of Othello as a
‘stupid brute’, encouraged by Iago’s animal metaphors, was the
inevitable outcome of an interpretation shaped by the bullﬁghting
metaphor that was Irving’s key to the central relationship. It is
hardly surprising that the same metaphor was to become the most
well-worn cliché of reviewing in the century of Iago-dominated
productions ushered in by Irving and Booth.3 It was they whose
performances helped to establish Iago as the dramatic centre of
the play, surpassing a tragic hero for whom ‘we really feel not
much more . . . than a half-familiar, half-contemptuous pity’.4
The Iagos they presented, however, were very different from the
resentful NCO who would emerge as the standard model for Shake-
speare’s ensign in the class-conscious Britain of the later twentieth
century. Booth’s was an Italianate intellectual, described as ‘the
epitome of the Latin temperament . . . [exhibiting] the inborn
malice of a race in its decline—a race that substitutes subtlety for
wasted strength’,5 while Irving’s was a more English ﬁgure, an

  1
     Richard Dickins, Forty Years of Shakespeare on the English Stage (London, n.d.),
p. 40, in Hankey, p. 94; while this piece of stage business was already well estab-
lished (Potter, p. 83), Booth seems to have made it especially chilling.
   2
     Anonymous review pasted into Folger Promptbooks Oth. 46 and 48.
   3
     See Rosenberg, p. 145; and cf. Ivor Brown, Observer, 26 July 1942 (‘There
stands Mr Valk, a burly, full-voiced and singularly static Moor. Round him skips the
gleaming volatile Iago of Mr Bernard Miles, half-matador, half-Machiavel, planting
the darts on the great bovine shoulders. The bull lashes out, gores his dearest, and
dies in the ring amid assorted carrion, as of mutilated horses in the darling sport of
holy Spain’); Brown, Observer, 21 Mar. 1953; Kenneth Tynan, Observer, 15 Oct. 1956
; Alan Brien, Sunday Telegraph, 15 Oct. 1956 (‘The combat in the play resembles far
more a stolid, half-blind ox, tormented by a tiny, blood-drunk dog’); Robert
Speaight, Tablet, 21 Oct. 1956; Alan Dent, Sunday Telegraph, 26 Apr. 1964; Tynan,
pp. 2, 8.
   4
     Macmillan’s Magazine (July 1881), in Hankey, pp. 92–3.
   5
     See above n. 2.

                                         77
                                   Introduction

upper-class dandy and adventurer, an artist in evil who (though
his mannerisms occasionally hinted at a private torment beneath
the cool surface) took an almost urbane pleasure in the ingenuity
of his own designs.1
   The sheer éclat of Irving’s Iago is a reminder that, however mis-
taken the tradition of burlesque villainy epitomized by Colley
Cibber’s performances, the most successful interpreters of the role
have always known how to exploit its comic strain. But, as we shall
see, this is also the aspect of the role that can most easily tilt the
delicate equilibrium at the centre of the play, tipping it fatally in the
direction of Iago’s corrosive cynicism. This was what happened
at the Old Vic in 1938, for example, when Tyrone Guthrie cast
Laurence Olivier as a ‘jovial, glib, bantering . . . good companion’
against Ralph Richardson’s sweetly reasonable but emotionally
underpowered Moor.2 Strongly inﬂuenced by their conversations
with the Freudian luminary Ernest Jones, Guthrie and Olivier
found a key to Iago’s character in the notion that he was driven not
by hatred, but by a sublimated homosexual passion for Othello.
What might have been the basis of a powerful new interpretation
seems to have been vitiated, however, by Richardson’s inability
or refusal to understand Olivier’s approach.3 Ivor Brown in the
Observer thought this ‘a radical and profoundly interesting’ Iago:
‘[i]t abounds in comedy, which is most useful, because this tragedy
has a kind of sensual squalor which is strangely different from
Shakespeare’s other pictures of sensuality’.4 But most reviewers
were bafﬂed, and, missing the dark subtext of Olivier’s perform-
ance, saw only the ‘gadﬂy’ undergraduate prankster, who played
so exuberantly to the crowd as to make Richardson’s performance
appear even more ‘heavy’ and bloodless than it might otherwise
have done.5 Moreover, as Brown later observed, ‘[I]f Iago is the
patently volatile and sinister creature that Mr Laurence Olivier
recently and vividly made him, nobody can believe his honesty,
and so the story of Othello’s credulity becomes impossible.’6
  1
     Potter, pp. 83–4.
  2
     Ivor Brown, Observer, and James Agate, Sunday Times, both 8 Feb. 1938.
   3
     Potter, p. 92; Rosenberg, pp. 158–9.
   4
     See above, n. 2.
   5
     The Times, 9 Feb. 1938.
   6
     Ivor Brown, Observer, 16 Apr. 1939. Reports of Sam Wanamaker’s ‘loud and
often funny’ Iago at Stratford in 1956 suggest that the success of this ‘slick shyster’
in gulling the other characters also tested the audience’s belief (Potter, p. 130).

                                         78
                                    Introduction

   Similar problems beset Michael Benthall’s production at the Old
Vic in 1956, when John Neville and Richard Burton renewed the
old Victorian device of exchanging parts on alternate nights.
Neville’s ‘capering spiv’ of an Iago, according to Kenneth Tynan,
reduced the central conﬂict to ‘a drab squabble between the
Chocolate Soldier and the Vagabond King’, whereas Burton’s Iago,
despite the inadequate scale of Neville’s ‘tormented sheikh’
(a ‘thinking Othello’ who, according to Milton Shulman, ‘resem-
ble[d] some Ethiopian lawyer studying a brief’1), brought the pro-
duction alive. ‘Paradoxically,’ Tynan reﬂected, ‘the only way to
play Iago is to respect the Moor. Let Iago mock the Moor with cheap
laughs, and the play collapses: it becomes the farce of an idiot gull
instead of the tragedy of a master-spirit. Mr Burton never under-
estimates Othello, nor in consequence do we. His Iago is dour
and earthy enough to convince any jury in the world. He does not
simulate sincerity, he embodies it. . . . the imposture is total and
terrifying.’2
   The successful Othellos of the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies had taken their cue from the great Restoration tragedian,
Thomas Betterton, who was equally admired for his ‘commanding
mien of majesty’ and for the physical intensity with which he
expressed ‘such a variety and vicissitude of passions as would
admonish a man to be afraid of his own heart’.3 Not every tra-
gedian could rise to Betterton’s heroic style, however: James Quin’s
stifﬂy declamatory manner ﬁtted the dignity, but not the passion of
the part; David Garrick—though he imagined the Moor as ‘an
African in whose veins circulated ﬁre instead of blood . . . [whose]
character could excuse all boldness of expression and all exaggera-
tions of passion’, and though he was determined to paint Othello’s
‘passion in all its violence’—was unable to match Betterton’s
majesty of stature and demeanour. This exposed him to the mock-
ery of Quin, who claimed to have seen ‘a little black boy . . . fret-
ting and fuming about the stage; but . . . no Othello’.4 Kemble, on
the other hand, though admired for grandeur, occasional pathos,

  1                                                          2
     Evening Standard, 23 Feb. 1956.                           Observer, 26 Feb. 1956.
  3
     Colley Cibber in Fone (ed.), Apology, p. 65; Richard Steele, The Tatler, 167 (2 May
1710)—both cited in Hankey, p. 29.
   4
     Frank Hedgecock, A Cosmopolitan Actor: David Garrick and his French Friends
(1912), p. 341 n.; William Cooke, Memoirs of the Life of Charles Macklin (1804),
p. 113, in Rosenberg, pp. 40, 42. See also Hankey, pp. 36–8.

                                          79
                                   Introduction

and the ‘mantle of mysterious solemnity’ in which he wrapped the
character, nevertheless seemed too philosophical and restrained,
too coldly ‘European’ to rise to the sublimity of Othello’s great
poetic arias.1 In the whole eighteenth century, perhaps only
Spranger Barry’s Moor, with his superb physique and magniﬁcent
deportment, was able to run the gamut from ‘digniﬁed and manly
forbearance’ in the early scenes, through tenderness and doubt, to
extravagant grief and ‘an amazing wildness of rage’2 in which
‘[y]ou could observe the muscles stiffening, the veins distending,
and the red blood boiling through his dark skin—a mighty ﬂood of
passion accumulating for several minutes—and at length bearing
down its barriers and sweeping onward in thunder, love, reason,
mercy, all before it’.3
   Equally powerful was the high-Romantic Othello of Edmund
Kean (ﬁg. 13). ‘To play Othello properly,’ wrote Hazlitt in his review
of Kean’s rival, Macready, an actor ‘ought to look taller and
grander than any tower’4—an effect that some eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century actors sought to achieve with the aid of cos-
tuming. Kean, however, lacked the heroic stature of most success-
ful Othellos—a handicap which he overcame by sheer force
of personality. His fury struck G. H. Lewes as ‘lion-like’, and he
reminded Keats of a ‘wild dog [feasting on] the savage relics of an
Eastern conﬂict’.5 Kean’s ‘[terriﬁc] energy of passion’, showing ‘all
the wild impetuosity of barbarous revenge [to be expected of] the
untamed children of the sun, whose blood drinks up the radiance
of ﬁercer skies’, was ultimately sufﬁcient to overcome even the ini-
tial scepticism of Hazlitt, who sought more brooding imagination
in the role.6 For all the emotional extravagance of his acting, how-

  1
     James Boaden, Memoirs of the Life of John Philip Kemble (1825), pp. 292, 256, in
Rosenberg, pp. 43–4. See also Hankey, pp. 48–50.
  2
     John Bernard, Retrospections of the Stage, ii. 26, in Rosenberg, p. 45. See also
Hankey, pp. 41–4.
  3
     Aaron Hill, Works, 4 vols. (1753), i. 217–18, in Rosenberg, pp. 45–6.
  4
     The Examiner, 13 Oct. 1816.
  5
     Henry Crabb Robinson, Diary, Reminiscences and Correspondence, ed. Thomas
Sadler, 2 vols. (1872), i. 225, in Hankey, p. 58; G. H. Lewes, On Actors and the Art of
Acting (New York, 1956), p. 18, in Rosenberg, p. 62.
  6
     William Hazlitt, Works, ed. P. P. Howe, 21 vols. (1930), xviii. 263, v. 216, 271,
in Hankey, pp. 57–8. See also Rosenberg, pp. 61–9. However, Kean’s ‘violent,
extravagant, and unnatural’ display of passion was insufﬁcient to convince William
Robson that he was watching anything ‘but a little vixenish black girl in short petti-
coats’ (cited in Hankey, p. 59).

                                         80
                               Introduction




  13. The Romantic Othello: Edmund Kean as the ﬁrst in a long line of
               lighter-skinned, orientalized Moors.


ever, it was Kean, with his light make-up, ﬂowing Eastern gar-
ments, and habit of preparing himself by intoning passages from
the Koran,1 who initiated the orientalization of the Moor—the
process that produced the increasingly restrained, gentlemanly
protagonists of the Victorian era, from the intellectual and domes-
tic Moor introduced by Macready (ﬁg. 14) to Beerbohm Tree’s
majestic Arab nobleman (ﬁg. 8).
   Macready himself seems to have attempted a more emotionally
extravagant interpretation of the part in later productions;2 but it
was the Victorian domestication of the role that he initiated which
made the outsized Othellos of Tommaso Salvini and Ernesto Rossi
in the 1870s and 1880s appear so devastatingly effective—even
though they could play the part only by the odd expedient of speak-
ing in their native Italian, whilst the remainder of the cast usually

                           1
                               Potter, p. 36.
                           2
                               Potter, pp. 37–8.

                                    81
                                   Introduction




        14. The Moor domesticated—William Charles Macready’s
                         Victorian Othello.


performed in English. At the opposite extreme from the sensitive
poetic Moor offered by their contemporary Edwin Booth, these
were performances that reduced the role to bare emotion, in which
mere words were of incidental signiﬁcance. Indeed, the fact that
these Othellos spoke in a foreign tongue incomprehensible to most
of the audience probably strengthened the impression of exotic
barbarity and ferocious animality on which commentators invari-
ably remarked.1
   1
     Tellingly, the Czech actor, Frederick Valk, praised by Agate as ‘the best Othello
since Salvini’ seems to have achieved his success as much because of as in spite of his
‘inability to speak English verse like an Englishman’. Since Englishness had come to
be seen as a ‘handicap’ in this part, a touch of foreignness was deemed helpful in
bringing out the ‘child and savage’ in Othello—see James Agate, The Times, 26 July
1942; W. A. Darlington, The Times, 23 July 1942.

                                         82
                                  Introduction

   Although Salvini, a light-skinned, turbaned Othello whose robes
were carefully modelled on paintings of ﬁfteenth-century Moors,
outwardly conformed to the orientalized style of Victorian protag-
onists, critics stressed the non-European quality of his perfor-
mance, even seeing it as distinctively ‘African’.1 This, together
with his interpretation of the role as involving the unsuccessful
struggle of a semi-civilized barbarian to repress his innate sav-
agery, encouraged the notion that the role was somehow of its
nature beyond the reach of English actors.2 But a more accurate
lesson from Salvini’s extraordinary triumph—and indeed from
Olivier’s a century later—might simply be that to bring Othello off
successfully an actor must submit himself fully to the sheer theatri-
cality of the part. This at least was the opinion of Godfrey Tearle,
perhaps the most generally admired of twentieth-century Othellos,
whose 1948 performance appeared to ‘dwarf all other recent
attempts at the character’.3 Tearle’s was an Othello ‘in the grand
manner, in which dramatic gesture and a towering presence
play[ed] second ﬁddle only to a wonderful feeling for the music and
magic of Shakespeare’s words’.4 Preparing for the role, Tearle pro-
nounced himself ‘in complete agreement with Bernard Shaw’s
brilliant comments on Othello’, citing at length Shaw’s description
of its sublime word-music, which expressed ‘exactly what I am try-
ing to achieve in the play’.5
   Comparing Tearle’s Moor with those of recent rivals, Alan Dent
likened him to ‘a venerable yew surrounded by thunderbolts and
all but riven by them’; rejoicing that there was ‘ham enough’ in
this performance ‘to make the very young stare, look pale, and stop
chatting’, Dent went on to argue that ‘if you do not bring a quality
of “ham” to Othello, the character just disappears’.6 The reason,
Bamber Gascoigne would later suggest when reviewing John
Gielgud’s disastrous Othello, is that an element of ‘ham’ is
inscribed in the character of Othello himself:

  1
     See e.g. James, pp. 173–5, cited in Hankey, pp. 86, 90, Rosenberg, p. 115; and
cf. Vaughan, p. 165.
   2
     See Rosenberg, pp. 103, 111; Vaughan, p. 167; Potter, p. 46.
   3
     ‘G.P.’, Manchester Guardian, 2 Aug. 1948.
   4
     Brian Harvey, Birmingham Evening Dispatch, 31 July 1948.
   5
     Interview in the Warwick Advertiser, 30 July 1948.
   6
     Observer, 1 Aug. 1948; Harold Hobson offered a similarly favourable conspectus
in the Sunday Times a week later.

                                        83
                                   Introduction

He crams his speeches with long words and learned allusions like an illit-
erate who has just bought an encyclopaedia. And his melodramatics are
crucial to the play. How else can one believe in his stupidity, unless it is
because the whole drama of jealousy mysteriously attracts him . . . This
love of bombast, being itself a quality that has to do with ‘performance’,
forces on the actor one particular style—the grand style.1

For Dent, however, even Tearle’s performance fell somewhere short
of the full extravagance demanded by the exoticism of the part:
‘Mr Tearle plays Othello as well as any pure Englishman may hope to
play him’, he concluded, suggesting that it was only ‘the dash
of Romany in Kean that brought his Othello to its ﬁnal famed
perfection’.2
   Such embarrassing appeals to racial essentialism would hardly
be worth retailing if they did not relate so directly to a casting prob-
lem that has beset the play for more than a century. Responding to
Anthony Quayle’s performance in 1953, Harold Hobson lamented
that while ‘theatrical annals are full of stories about the great
things done by Othellos of the past . . . no recent Othello, not even
the late Sir Godfrey Tearle, has won such notices; we seem now to
have lost the trick of acting this play’.3 The trick was certainly not
available to John Gielgud, arguably the greatest Shakespearian
actor of the century, when he attempted the part in Franco
Zefﬁrelli’s Stratford production of 1961. Despite his physical resem-
blance to ‘a rather prim Indian civil servant’, most critics agreed
that Gielgud’s ‘nobility [was] absolute’; and his ‘vocal virtuosity
[in] the recital of the Othello music’—‘a torrent of operatic
sound’—was widely praised;4 but in the scenes of passion ‘a
querulous maniac took over and the performance deteriorated into
an orgy of clawing, clutching, and ranting gestures’.5 To Milton
Shulman he resembled ‘an hysterical aunt’, while for Bamber

  1
      Spectator, 20 Oct. 1956.
  2
      Observer, 1 Aug. 1948.
  3
      Sunday Times, 21 Mar. 1953. Cf. Ruth Ellis’s review of the same production in
the Stratford Herald, 28 Nov. 1952: ‘The large—and, in part savage—simplicity of
Othello does not lend itself to many of the endearing graces that the public expects
in leading actors. There is the choice of wresting the whole play to tune with a per-
fect English gentleman in the name part, or risking playgoers’ sympathies by trying
to stick to Shakespeare.’
   4
      ‘W.H.W.’, Birmingham Mail, 11 Oct. 1961; J. C. Trewin, Birmingham Post,
11 Oct. 1961, Illustrated London News, 21 Oct. 1961; The Times, 11 Oct. 1961.
   5
      Milton Shulman, Evening Standard, 15 Oct. 1961.

                                        84
                                   Introduction

Gascoigne, his inability to rise to the grand style reduced Othello’s
‘exhibitionism’ to comedy: ‘After Othello had reeled about the
stage . . . for some time, uttering sharp cries of jealousy, I became
convinced that what we were watching must be Le Jaloux, a long-
lost comedy by Molière.’1
   Gielgud was probably not helped by Ian Bannen’s Iago: Bannen
had revived Olivier’s idea of a homosexually motivated tempter,
but his failure to exploit the comic side of the role reduced the
villain to ‘a jabbering psychopath . . . in whose teeming breast
nihilism and asceticism ﬁght their deadly battle’.2 However, to
most reviewers the main weakness of the production seemed to
lie in Gielgud himself—especially his failure to realize what J. C.
Trewin described as ‘the primitive side of the Moor. . . . [H]e
is always white, clean white inside. His inﬂammability is not
naturally racial.’3 A great deal about Laurence Olivier’s much dis-
cussed performance in the production by John Dexter at the Old Vic
in 1964 can be explained in terms of his strenuous reaction to the
lessons of Gielgud’s failure: if Gielgud’s Moor had seemed too sen-
sitive and civilized, then the keynote of Olivier’s performance
would be pride and barbaric glamour; if Gielgud had been a tenor
in a bass role,4 then Olivier would lower his own voice to a rich
baritone;5 if Gielgud had seemed too ‘white’, Olivier, with his elab-
orate pastiche of African (or was it Caribbean?) speech, movement
and gesture, would set out to be the ‘blackest’ Othello the English
stage had yet seen.6 From his celebrated ﬁrst appearance, snifﬁng
at a long-stemmed pink rose as he lolled against the set, through
the famous moment in his revenge speech (3.3.460) when he tore
off the cruciﬁx that had become the symbol of his adopted Chris-
tian identity, to his ﬁnal descent into ‘an irrational, animal-like

  1
     Spectator, 20 Oct. 1961.
  2
     Daily Mail, 11 Oct. 1961.
   3
     Trewin, Birmingham Post, 11 Oct. 1961.
   4
     W. A. Darlington, Daily Telegraph, 11 Oct. 1961.
   5
     See Tynan, p. 4, for Orson Welles’s protests about Olivier’s limitations as
‘a natural tenor’; Olivier’s own comments on his efforts to master the ‘dark violet,
velvet stuff’ in this ‘bass part’ in Richard Meryman, ‘The Great Sir Laurence’, Life,
36:9 (18 May 1964), p. 74.
   6
     While critics were signiﬁcantly divided as to whether Olivier’s Moor was West
African or West Indian, all were struck by his self-conscious parade of blackness—
see e.g. Herbert Kretzmer, Daily Express, 22 Apr. 1964: ‘Has Othello, I wonder, ever
been played by quite so black a man?’

                                         85
                                  Introduction

state’,1 Olivier’s Othello was the antithesis of Gielgud’s noble but
dangerously fragile lyricist. This was a Moor whose passionate
sensuality proved to be simply the more attractive face of the
unbridled savage set loose by Iago’s machinations. Olivier might
have delivered Othello’s traveller’s tales in 1.3 with an edge of
irony, as though aware that this was the sort of exoticism that a
white audience would expect; but it was primitive superstition as
much as Christian piety that made him cross himself at Brabantio’s
accusations of witchcraft.2
   As if learning a lesson from Errol John’s difﬁculties when he
played Othello in the same theatre a year earlier, Olivier was deter-
mined that there should be no contest with his Iago. ‘Physically
and vocally . . . too small for the part’, and further handicapped by
his youth, John found himself (like so many twentieth-century
Othellos) paired with an Iago whose relish for the comic possibil-
ities of his role made him a dangerously commanding theatrical
presence: this was the ebullient Leo McKern, an older and more
experienced performer, who had already outplayed Anthony
Quayle’s Othello a decade earlier.3 Olivier was convinced that if ‘no
English actor in [the twentieth] century had succeeded in the part’,
it was mainly because ‘[t]he play . . . belonged to Iago, who could
always make the Moor look a credulous idiot’. If he took on the
challenge, he insisted, then he must not have ‘a witty, Machiavel-
lian Iago [but] a solid, honest-to-God N.C.O.’4 This was precisely
what he got from Frank Finlay (ﬁg. 15), whose deliberately prosaic
vocal style and tightly controlled underplaying contrasted as
sharply with Olivier’s ﬂorid histrionics as his drab costume with the
latter’s loose, ﬂamboyant robes and barbaric jewellery. In the eyes
of many critics, Olivier’s Moor seemed to hark back to the great
Othellos of the Romantic era: Alan Dent recalled G. H. Lewes’s nos-
talgic question, ‘When shall we see [again] that lion-like power and


  1
     Tynan, pp. 6, 9; Harold Hobson, Sunday Times, 26 Apr. 1964 (Tynan,
pp. 104–5); Richard Christiansen, Chicago Daily News, 23 May 1964. In a variation
on Olivier’s gesture that beautifully concentrated the destructive contradictions of
his being, Mendes (National, 1997) had David Harewood stab himself in the neck
with a blade concealed in his equally prominent cruciﬁx, on which he and Iago
had sworn their oaths at the end of the temptation scene (3.3).
  2
     See Tynan, p. 6.
  3
     The Times, 31 Jan. 1963.
  4
     Tynan, p. 2.

                                        86
                                   Introduction




  15. ‘A ﬁgment of a white man’s imagination’: Sir Laurence Olivier as
         Othello, Frank Finlay as Iago (National Theatre, 1964).



. . . grace—that dreadful culmination of wrath, alternating with
bursts of agony, that Kean gave us?’, and then announced ‘[t]he
answer is here and now with the Olivier Othello’.1 Just as Kean
had seemed to Dumas père ‘a wild beast, half-man, half tiger’,2 so
Olivier appeared to Bernard Levin ‘as though a wild beast has been
sewn up inside him and is clawing to get out’.3


  1
     Financial Times, 22 Apr. 1964 (Tynan, p. 102). By contrast, Alan Brien saw this
as ‘the splendid last ﬂing of a declining style of acting’ (Sunday Telegraph, 26 Apr.
1964; Tynan, pp. 103–4).
  2
     As cited by Dent, Financial Times.
  3
     Daily Mail, 22 Apr. 1964 (Tynan, p. 103).

                                        87
                                  Introduction

   If Olivier’s combination of aristocratic swagger and savage
otherness was largely created by the very ‘elements of . . . the all-
stops-out “ham” acting’1 that Gascoigne had missed in Gielgud,
the restrained naturalism of Finlay’s performance asked to be read
as both a class and an ethnic marker. But it also helped to ensure
Olivier’s effortless dominance of the stage. This Iago might be the
‘ring-master’ of his own sadistic circus, but the peak of his psycho-
logical control was to be expressed in a watchful stillness: at the
climax of the temptation scene he would remain immobile, Dexter
suggested, giving the Moor only ‘an occasional ﬂick of the whip—
like “Nay, that’s not your way”—to keep him in order’;2 it was
Olivier ‘circl[ing] the stage, a caged jungle king in extremis’ who
was to be the primary focus of attention.
   Ironically enough, in Stuart Burge’s screen version, to which
Finlay’s underplaying was naturally attuned, this carefully con-
trived imbalance was reversed, making Olivier’s theatricality seem
fatally overblown; and, for those who have encountered it only
through the ﬁlm, the power of Olivier’s stage performance has
become difﬁcult to re-imagine. Perhaps this was indeed, as Alan
Brien conjectured, ‘the splendid last ﬂing of a declining style of act-
ing’;3 for, while the years since Dexter’s production have yielded a
series of brilliant Iagos, they have failed to produce a single Othello
to match the charismatic energy of Olivier. Thus, though it
received mixed notices and was so comprehensively overshadowed
by Olivier’s Moor, Frank Finlay’s Iago has proved in the end to be
the more inﬂuential performance. Finlay’s conception of the vil-
lain involved two main sources of motivation—sexual nausea and
class resentment. Perhaps affected by Micheál MacLiammóir’s
performance in Orson Welles’s ﬁlm,4 as well as by Olivier’s earlier
conception of the part, Finlay thought of Iago as a man whose
personality was deformed by his repressed homosexuality. This
sexual pathology would be more elaborately developed by later
Iagos, including David Suchet (1985), Ian McKellen (1989), Simon
Russell Beale (1997), and Richard McCabe (1999);5 but in Finlay’s
  1
     Alan Seymour in Tynan, p. 14.
  2
     John Dexter in Tynan, p. 10.
  3
     Sunday Telegraph, 26 Apr. 1964.
   4
     See Potter, pp. 143–4, 146.
   5
     In Oliver Parker’s 1995 ﬁlm, Kenneth Branagh played yet another impotent,
wife-beating Iago, but in his case the strongest suggestion of homosexuality came in
a scene with Roderigo (Potter, p. 195).

                                        88
                                  Introduction

case unacknowledged desire for Othello was conceived as part of a
carefully layered set of motives and would be allowed to surface
only at certain key moments—as for instance in the temptation
scene, when (as Iago whispered his poisons in Othello’s ear) ‘the
two men . . . sway[ed] together in a sickening rhythm that sug-
gest[ed] a bond uniting them closer than marriage’.1 Unlike some
later Iagos in this tradition, including McKellen and Kenneth
Branagh (1995), who found in Iago’s reﬂections on his supposed
cuckoldry a source of deep, pathological resentment, Finlay deliv-
ered his soliloquies in an almost offhand fashion—as though ex-
planation were something offered merely to satisfy the foolish
curiosity of his audience. A more conspicuous source of bitterness
was supplied by the class difference insisted on by Olivier, and
emphasized by Finlay’s ﬂat regional accent. If this, together with
his buff-coated plainness helped to make him, in the eyes of one
critic, ‘the only [Iago] I have ever seen who comes near to justifying
the title “honest” ’,2 it also contributed to a strong sense that class
resentment fuelled the racial hatred of this ‘redneck’ bigot. Here
Finlay was following a line of interpretation that seems to have
begun with Anthony Quayle’s ‘Liverpudlian spiv’ in Tearle’s 1948
production, and which (despite its demonstrable anachronism) his
own performance seems to have cemented as an orthodoxy.3
   Thus, although John Barton’s 1971 production for the RSC
was conceived in conscious reaction against Dexter and Olivier, it

  1
     Hobson, Sunday Times.
  2
     Bamber Gascoigne, Observer, 26 Apr. 1964 (Tynan, pp. 107–8).
  3
     Brian Harvey, Birmingham Evening Dispatch, 31 July 1948. However, Potter
(p. 187) cites a 1929 Birmingham Repertory Theatre production for which the pro-
gramme listed Iago as ‘Staff Sergeant Major’. Apart from those discussed below,
other Iagos in this tradition have included John Neville at the Old Vic in 1956—a
‘rough-spoken, cruelly leering corner boy’ (The Times, 22 Feb. 1956); Bob Hoskins in
Jonathan Miller’s 1981 production for BBC television—a ‘cheerfully psychotic’ cock-
ney thug (Potter, p. 155); Philip Whitchurch’s ‘scouse’ Iago at the Lyric, Hammer-
smith, in 1984; Paul Barber’s Lancashire-accented corporal at the Greenwich
Theatre (1989); Paul Whitworth’s cockney RSM at Santa Cruz (1997); and Rupert
Wickham’s ‘nerdish Essex-man squaddie’ at the Cochrane Theatre in 2002 (Patrick
Marmion, Evening Standard, 7 Feb. 2002). Anachronistic though its class assump-
tions may be, this tradition has become so entrenched in British theatre that when
the English director Jude Kelly staged Othello in 1997 for the Shakespeare Theatre
in Washington, DC, Ron Canada’s Iago was presented as a burly, rather sullen
Sergeant, given to vulgarly obscene gestures—even though the class suggestions of
such a characterization did not map particularly well on to the American military
setting of the production.

                                        89
                                  Introduction

included an Iago who was indentiﬁably kin to Finlay’s. Barton
sought in a number of ways to deﬂect attention from the contem-
porary racial resonances that had been so important for Dexter’s
production: he relocated the action to a Victorian colonial setting,
a ‘Kiplingesque cantonment’, ‘heavy with the fantasies of men
herded together in the heat’;1 while Brewster Mason’s rather pale-
skinned Moor deliberately eschewed any suggestion of primitive
emotion. Arguably an Iago who was once again an alienated NCO,
driven by bitterness over class and rank, was better suited to this
conception of the play than to Dexter’s.2 But Emrys James, who
exploited the comic side of the role more than Finlay had done,
easily upstaged Mason’s noble but rather monotonous hero. James
played the ensign as ‘a Figaro in puttees’, ‘[p]ink, brisk and
bristly, with the foxy smile of a regimental clown’; by turns ‘frivo-
lous’, ‘volatile’, and ghoulishly psychopathic,3 his was a perform-
ance that once again illustrated the dangers of allowing Iago to
monopolize the play’s theatricality. Barton, complained Jeremy
Kingston, had made James ‘the puppetmaster’ and had directed
Mason ‘to be his creature’: the result, according to Frank
Marcus, more resembled the ‘tragi-comedy of Iago’ than the
tragedy of Othello.4
   Something similar happened in each of the three important
Othellos that followed, beginning with Ronald Eyre’s production for
the RSC in 1979: transferring from Stratford to the Aldwych in
1980, it ran opposite Peter Hall’s version at the National Theatre,
prompting the Evening Standard to announce a theatrical duel
between the rival principals.5 But in each case, as with Jonathan
Miller’s production for the BBC Shakespeare in the following year,
it was Iago who seemed to dominate. In the RSC Othello Sinden’s

   1
     Gareth Lloyd Evans, Guardian, 10 Sept. 1971. Dexter’s conception of Cyprus
seems to have been borrowed from the Russian director Konstantin Stanislavski,
who suggested that ‘Cyprus, Candia, and Mauritania [should be seen as] conquered
provinces, under the heavy heel of Venice. . . . The arrogant Doges, Senators, and
aristocrats do not look upon the conquered people as human beings’ (Creating a
Role, trans. Elizabeth Reynolds Hapgood (New York, 1961; repr. 1989), pp. 168–9,
cited in Potter, p. 99).
   2
     B. A. Young, Financial Times, 10 Sept. 1971; Jeremy Kingston, Punch, 22 Sept.
1971.
   3 Ronald Bryden, Observer, 12 Sept. 1971; B. A. Young, Financial Times, 10 Sept.

1971.
   4
     Punch, 22 Sept. 1971; Sunday Telegraph, 12 Sept. 1971.
   5
     ‘Othello: Scoﬁeld v. Sinden’, Evening Standard, 16 Mar. 1980.

                                        90
                                   Introduction

‘handsome, immaculately uniformed Moor’ aimed for something
of Olivier’s largeness of scale, but struck one reviewer as having
‘more of the operetta than grand opera about him’; his pastiche of
‘melodramatic gesture and vocal mannerisms’ remaining ‘too
superﬁcial to invest the part with any sense of . . . the heroic or the
tragic’, with the result that he was generally overshadowed by Bob
Peck’s ‘buoyant villainy’ as Iago.1 Michael Billington thought that
Sinden caught ‘something of the play’s vulgar excitement’ in the
‘high ecstasy of jealousy’ that reduced him to ‘riﬂing though his
wife’s laundry basket for stained sheets’;2 but for most reviewers it
was Peck’s ‘big, tough, reliable-looking NCO’ who held centre
stage.3 Playing the ensign as ‘an icy upstart, with a ﬂat, faintly
Lancashire voice and an indifferent, throwaway manner’, he
undermined Sinden’s ‘romantic style’ by the way in which he
seemed determined to reduce the action to ‘a kind of cynical
farce’.4 The effect of this comic emphasis was to expose all of the
improbabilities in the plot of which Iago-critics since Rymer had
complained: ‘As Othello picked up each hint, he got laughs . . .
these were because of the incongruous speed with which Iago’s
poison was working. It was like watching a mere mechanical
conjuring trick. . . . I felt sorry for him as I would for a dog being
baited, but I couldn’t in the end get involved.’5
   The balance between Othello and Iago was almost equally lop-
sided in Peter Hall’s production at the National Theatre in 1980.
Here Michael Bryant, ‘white-haired and clownish . . . the smiling
villain of melodrama playing the innocent’, ‘a snickering charmer
with an unsatisﬁed sexual itch’, gave what one critic described as ‘a
performance so staggeringly apt that you want to get up and hit
him’.6 His Iago was generally felt to overmatch Paul Scoﬁeld’s
mannered Othello, which—while seldom rising to ‘the full “ham”

  1
     Ian Stewart, Country Life, 17 Apr. 1980.
  2
     Guardian, 15 Aug. 1980. Eric Shorter described him as ‘rummag[ing] through
[the] basket with real passion and appetite, snifﬁng like a hound at the sheets’ (Daily
Telegraph, 9 Aug. 1979).
   3
     Michael Billington, Guardian, 8 Aug. 1979.
   4
     Shorter, Telegraph; Alan Drury, Listener, 16 Aug. 1979; Gareth Lloyd Evans,
Stratford Herald, 10 Aug. 1979.
   5
     Drury, Listener. The critical response to David Suchet’s performance in Terry
Hands’s 1985–6 RSC production suggests that it produced much the same result.
   6
     Stewart, Country Life; Michael Billington, 21 Mar. 1980; Barry Took, Punch,
2 Apr. 1980.

                                          91
                                Introduction

of the role’—remained theatrical in a way that for most critics
distracted from the characterization, rather than informing it as
Olivier’s had. Robert Cushman thought that the self-regarding
quality of the performance signalled acceptance of ‘the Eliot-
Leavis view of the Moor: an egotist who deserves even more than
he gets’;1 but for others it seemed gratuitous: ‘[w]hat set . . . Mr
Scoﬁeld apart’, wrote James Fenton, ‘[was] not his blackness, but
his acting’; this Othello ‘was certainly not in love with his wife, but
he had deep feelings for the audience to whom he would regularly
appeal with looks that seemed to say: is this face of mine not truly
remarkable? this voice not utterly profound? is not the white of this
eye the whitest you ever saw?’2
   For the BBC Jonathan Miller devised a consciously small-scale
domestic production, its visual style shaped by seventeenth-cen-
tury Dutch interior paintings, which virtually excluded Othello’s
larger political and social concerns to concentrate on the story
of a marriage destroyed by extreme jealousy and inexplicable
malice. Believing the issue of Othello’s colour to be a distraction,
and one that risked racial stereotyping, Miller cast Anthony
Hopkins as a conspicuously pale Moor, whose racial difference
from the Venetians was barely marked even by costume; and his
low-key naturalistic performance, suggesting an oddly withdrawn,
sometimes ironic, sometimes slightly neurotic personality, left the
screen to be dominated by Bob Hoskins’s gleeful cockney Iago.
Strongly inﬂuenced by Miller’s reading of the celebrated W. H.
Auden essay, ‘The Joker in the Pack’, Hoskins’s was a performance
full of comic relish and sniggering asides, whose keynote was
established in the ﬁrst scene, where a panicky Roderigo was
repeatedly forced to restrain Iago’s boisterous improvisation out-
side Brabantio’s window. Othello’s suicide evidently struck Iago as
the best joke of all. This clearly was not a production that allowed
much space for heroic gesture, even had Hopkins been interested in
providing it. Across the Atlantic in Stratford, Connecticut (1981),
James Earl Jones, who had been Miller’s ﬁrst choice for Othello, was
just as easily upstaged by Christopher Plummer’s ﬂamboyant Iago,
who (in an exaggerated version of Edwin Booth’s famous coup)


                1
                    Robert Cushman, Observer, 23 Mar. 1980.
                2
                    James Fenton, Sunday Times, 23 Mar. 1980.

                                      92
                                   Introduction

‘ended the play by rising from the ﬂoor to wave his sash in the air
and laugh in triumph’.1
   By contrast, in Ben Kingsley and David Suchet, Terry Hands’s
1985/6 production for the RSC at last found what Michael
Billington thought were ‘an Othello and Iago of equal weight and
value’.2 Billington praised Kingsley for offering ‘not the usual
coffee-stained clubman, but a poised, digniﬁed Moor with a scimi-
tar, and white ﬂowing robes’, a man with the intelligence and
conﬁdence to win over a hostile Senate with humour; and he
was equally admiring of Suchet’s Iago who was ‘not the calculat-
ing Audenesque practical joker, but a crafty improviser forever
thinking on his feet’. ‘Memorably vile . . . a profane and laughing
roisterer . . . seething with a dangerous vitality’, Suchet was
nevertheless praised as one of those rare Iagos who ‘you would
swear was dead honest’.3 Because race and class were less impor-
tant than sex in Hands’s conception of the play, Kingsley could
suggest that ‘Othello and Iago are almost two faces of the same
man. They are both suffering from the same psychological disturb-
ance.’4 Each, Kingsley and Hands believed, was possessed by
covert desire for the other; and the programme included a long
excerpt from a recent psychiatric text suggesting that neurotic jeal-
ousy like Othello’s might have its basis in repressed homosexuality,
while (like Olivier’s and Finlay’s) Suchet’s Iago was shown as
‘secretly possessed by homosexual longing for the Moor’ and driven
‘to destroy what he can never possess’.5 The ambivalence of Iago’s
feelings emerged most tellingly when, after Othello’s ﬁt, Suchet
cradled Kingsley’s head in his hands, thereby revealing ‘a . . . stun-
ning shaft of sympathetic vulnerability in his portrayal’.6
   For some critics this was ‘the best Othello since Olivier’.7 For all
its strengths, however, the domestic scale of the production,
together with the narrowness of political focus revealed by its

  1
     Scott McMillin, ‘Criticism and Productions of Othello since 1984’, in the second
edition of Sanders’s New Cambridge Othello (2003), p. 56.
  2
     Guardian, 26 Sept. 1985.
  3
     John Barber, Daily Telegraph, 26 Sept. 1985.
  4
     Observer Colour Magazine, 22 Sept. 1985.
  5
     Nicholas de Jongh, Guardian, 9 Jan. 1986; Irving Wardle, The Times, 25 Sept.
1985.
  6
     Michael Coveney, Financial Times, 9 Jan. 1986.
  7
     Michael Ratcliffe, Observer, 29 Sept. 1985; and cf. Michael Coveney, Financial
Times, 26 Sept. 1985.

                                         93
                                Introduction

refusal to distinguish between the ordered metropolitan world of
Venice and the anarchic violence of colonial Cyprus, threatened to
reduce it to a ‘chamber tragi-comedy’;1 and Kingsley’s inability to
rise to the vocal challenge of ‘that pervasive Othello music which
. . . gives the play its humanity’, together with Suchet’s tendency
to play for laughs, meant that even this Iago tended to ‘cut the
ground from under . . . Othello’ and to ‘displace . . . the Moor from
the forefront of attention’.2
    When Patrick Stewart undertook Othello in 1997, he was
warned by a fellow actor that ‘the role is simply unactable’;3 and
looking back at the history of the part on the twentieth-century
stage, Charles Merivale’s insistence in 1902 that Iago is the true
centre of this tragedy begins to seem prophetic. In this whole
period it is possible to single out no more than four outstandingly
successful Othellos: of these, the triumphs of Paul Robeson and
John Kani had as much to do with political context and the person-
al heroism of the two actors as with the intrinsic quality of their
performances, whilst Godfrey Tearle’s and Laurence Olivier’s per-
formances (for all the latter’s ostentatious mimicry of contempor-
ary black style) relied on personal magnetism combined with a
deliberate reversion to the histrionic extravagance of Victorian
heroic acting. If the naturalistic acting encouraged by ﬁlm and
television has made Olivier’s style of heroic impersonation seem
conspicuously outmoded, it has also (as both Julie Hankey and Lois
Potter point out4) seemed to put a swagger-part like Othello beyond
the reach of most contemporary actors. In so far as they have
attempted to rise to the emotional theatricality of the role, they
have often succeeded in arousing laughter, making the hero ‘some-
thing of an embarrassment, [like] an eccentric guest, stumbling in
on an intelligent conversation, out of another period, another
play’.5
    Powerful Iagos, by contrast, have been more and more the rule.
The success of David Calder, as yet another ‘hard-bitten N.C.O.’
at the Young Vic in 1984—‘a coarse, vulgar manipulator, with a

  1
    De Jongh, Guardian; Ratcliffe, Observer.
  2
    John Barber, Daily Telegraph, 26 Sept. 1985; Delia Couling, Tablet, 18 Jan.
1986; de Jongh, Guardian.
  3
    Interview with David Richards, Washington Post, 12 Nov. 1997.
  4
    Hankey, pp. 119–20, Potter, p. 153.
  5
    Hankey, p. 119.

                                      94
                                 Introduction

dirty mind and a sweaty body’—was enough to make one critic
understand ‘why Verdi nearly called his opera Iago’;1 and the drift
towards full realization of Merivale’s Iago-centred play probably
reached its apogee in the dazzling performances of Ian McKellen
(1989) and Simon Russell Beale (1997).
    In Trevor Nunn’s production, staged at RSC’s studio theatre, The
Other Place, and subsequently ﬁlmed for television, McKellen was
cast opposite the Jamaican-born opera singer, Willard White. With
his ‘leonine’ gait and appearance, and a voice ‘of matchless power
and resonance’ White was an impressive and digniﬁed Moor,
whose performance was characterized by a certain ‘old-fashioned
grandeur’; but while his ‘imperious rages’ made a strong impres-
sion, he ‘lack[ed] that tiger-like bestiality which Henry James found
in the great Salvini’; and missing the ‘heroic self-dramatization’
of Olivier, he was reckoned even less successful at sounding
‘the famous Othello music’ which conveys the deep anguish of the
part.2 As a result White was inevitably overmatched by McKellen’s
‘devastating performance’ as ‘a sturdy, buttoned-down, bottled-up
redneck NCO’ with a Hitler moustache, a ‘ramrod-straight back
. . . , clipped Northern consonants’, and a neurotic passion for
tidiness.3 Fixing his victims with ‘the hypnotic snake-stare of true
paranoia’, this was a man ‘with the soul of a servant and the
instincts of a destroyer’.4 In Michael Billington’s judgement
McKellen’s was ‘the most complex and fascinating Iago since that
of . . . Emrys James’5—from which indeed much of its inspiration
derived. Unlike James and many other dominant Iagos, however,
McKellen—though he used his soliloquies to draw the audience
into uneasy complicity—did not exploit the comic side of the char-
acter. Instead he riveted viewers’ attention by means of the psy-
chological intensity that informed the minutest details of his
meticulously observed performance: his hoarding of ‘[a] little

  1
    Michael Billington, Guardian, 11 May 1984; Brian Masters, The Standard,
14 May 1984; Martin Hoyle, Financial Times, 12 May 1984.
  2
    Harry Eyres, The Times, 26 Aug. 1989; John Peter, Sunday Times, 27 Aug.
1989; Maureen Paton, Daily Express, 25 Aug. 1989; Michael Billington, Guardian,
26 Aug. 1989. Michael Coveney, however, hailed White as ‘probably the ﬁrst
genuinely monumental black Othello . . . since Paul Robeson’s in 1959’ (Financial
Times, 26 Aug.).
  3
    Peter, Sunday Times; Coveney, Financial Times; Billington, Guardian.
  4
    Jack Tinker, Daily Mail, 26 Aug. 1989.
  5
    Billington, Guardian.

                                       95
                                Introduction

baccy-tin for half smoked cheroots’; ‘the obsessive way he tidie[d]
his barrack-room blankets’ or anxiously gathered up fallen papers
even as Othello was threatening to kill him; the display of false
warmth with which he repeatedly embraced other characters; his
careful ritualization of the mock-marriage that climaxes the temp-
tation scene. At the end of the play, in a signature that recalled
Edwin Booth’s famous coup, McKellen was left to survey the car-
nage he had created, ‘his pallid face staring down on [the] corpses
[of his victims] with nothing more than blank curiosity in his dead
eyes’.1As the Times reviewer observed, the problem with such
a bravura display of technique is that Iago’s ‘victims become too
easily . . . the asses he considers them to be’.2 If White was power-
ful and digniﬁed enough to fend off this danger, he still had noth-
ing to match the sinister allure of a performance in which almost
every line was decorated with some piece of beguiling business.3
   Nunn’s colonial Cyprus was a ‘heat-crazed province’ under
military occupation, and the scenes there were full of the seamy
claustrophobia of a male-dominated barrack-room world.4 It was
a remarkably similar world that Sam Mendes created for the
National Theatre in 1997, except that the action was pushed for-
ward from Edwardian times to the imperial twilight of the 1930s.
This setting enabled Simon Russell Beale’s ‘almost too intelligent’
Iago to develop the hints of fascism in McKellen’s martinet, whose
buttoned-up, anal-retentive characterization he had evidently
studied. Better known as a comic actor, Beale made use of an
impeccable sense of timing to manipulate the audience’s response,
without actually playing for laughs. He capitalized on his stout,
rather ungainly physical appearance, coarsening his plump fea-
tures with a brutal crew-cut to create an Iago whose sense of class
inferiority was exacerbated by his physical unattractiveness (ﬁg.
16), and cruelly exposed by the rogue vowels that cut through his
carefully cultivated middle-class accent. Resembling a ‘squat,
psychotic toad’, or a ‘terrifyingly articulate, obscenely cunning
slug’, Beale was ‘a Thersites pretending to be one of the boys’;
‘[b]rimming with aggressive geniality’, he was nevertheless ‘an

                 1
                     Tinker, Mail; Potter, pp. 191–2.
                 2
                     Eyres, The Times.
                 3
                     Potter, p. 192.
                 4
                     Tinker, Mail; Coveney, Financial Times.

                                     96
                                 Introduction




     16. Drama of class hatred: Simon Russell Beale’s Iago as ‘tragic
             bureaucrat’ (Royal National Theatre, 1997).



unmistakable sadist’ with a dangerously short fuse, who viciously
dashed a despatch box from a desk on ‘I hate the Moor’ (1.3.375),
and who contemptuously kicked Othello as he lay unconscious
after his ﬁt in 4.1. Capable of what might even have been taken for
real tenderness in the brothel scene when he urged Desdemona ‘Do
not weep’ (4.2.124), he exhibited a nauseated aversion for his own
wife, which was only matched by the visceral self-disgust that had
him retching at the end of the temptation scene. Beale exploited
every psychological nuance in the text, making it plain that the
hatred and contempt seething beneath his acquiescent mask arose
from a genuinely ‘gnawing conviction that Othello once bedded his
wife’.1
  1
    Paul Taylor, Independent, 19 Sept. 1997; Charles Spencer, Telegraph, 18 Sept.
1997; Susannah Clapp, Independent, 21 Sept. 1997; John Gross, Sunday Telegraph,
21 Sept. 1997; Jane Edwardes, Time Out, 24 Sept. 1997.

                                       97
                                    Introduction

   Challenging the orthodox notion that Iago’s express motives are
simply improvised excuses, Beale made it plain that all of Iago’s
resentments, not least his bitterness over promotion, demanded to
be taken entirely seriously, convincing John Peter that Coleridge’s
idea of ‘motiveless malignity’ had completely ‘miss[ed] the point’.1
At the dark heart of his ‘sexually maimed’ psyche there once again
lay guilty sexual desire for the Moor: it was buried ‘so deep that
he hardly recognizes it in himself, but when he tenderly strokes
Othello’s cheek a window is thrown open on the play’.2 Like
McKellen’s this was also a performance rich with telling detail:3 as
for instance at the end of 2.3, when Iago gleefully illustrated his
plot with the same cards that he had just used to trick Cassio into
his disastrous drinking bout, wickedly ﬂourishing the Ace of
Spades (Othello), the Queen of Hearts (Desdemona), and the Knave
of Hearts (Cassio). Dubbed a ‘Tragic Bureaucrat’ by one American
reviewer,4 this Iago was an assiduous snapper up of unconsidered
triﬂes, forever picking up dropped or discarded objects and stufﬁng
them into his tight pockets for future use—so that the business
with the handkerchief seemed less like a melodramatically con-
trived stratagem than the natural extension of a habit of politic
thrift.5
   Against ‘[t]his daredevil performance’,6 David Harewood’s
handsome but too youthful and emotionally limited Moor, with his
sometimes oddly staccato or sing-song delivery, stood little chance.
Mendes had planned to cast the more experienced Adrian Lester
in the part, after failing to secure his original choice, the distin-
guished African American actor Morgan Freeman;7 and either of
these might have made for a better balanced production. Although
Harewood was praised for the ‘magniﬁcent, monumental sim-
plicity’ of his conception, for the physical impressiveness of his

  1
     Sunday Times, 21 Sept. 1997.
  2
     Gross, Sunday Telegraph; Spencer, Telegraph.
  3
     See also Robert Butler’s perceptive review in the Independent, 21 Sept. 1997.
   4
     Charles McNulty, Village Voice, 21 Apr. 1998, cited in Potter, p. 199.
   5
     The handkerchief plot was more imaginatively handled in this than in any
other production I know of: brilliantly exploiting the play’s own propensity for blur-
ring the boundaries of theatrical illusion, Mendes arranged that ‘the fatal handker-
chief gets left on the tiles throughout the interval, as if challenging one of us to pick
it up and prevent a tragedy’ (Butler, Independent).
   6
     Butler, Independent.
   7
     David Lister, Independent, 7 Aug. 1997.

                                          98
                                 Introduction

performance, and for a moving last scene, there was a feeling that
he ‘[did] not fully inhabit his role’;1 and the result was an entire
consensus that this was Beale’s play; indeed, the Daily Mail critic
went so far as to repeat Verdi’s suggestion that the tragedy ‘should
be retitled Iago’.2
   So overwhelming was Beale’s success that his performance
seems to have provided an almost complete template for Richard
McCabe’s ensign in Michael Attenborough’s RSC production
(Stratford, 1999, and Barbican, 2000). Reﬂecting the same obses-
sion with the imperial past that had coloured Nunn’s and Mendes’s
productions, Attenborough once again located the main action in
a Cyprus that resembled a British colonial outpost; and McCabe
was yet another ‘archetypal N.C.O.’ ‘[P]allid and pudgy of face,
but with neat military movements’, ‘poker-backed [and] pigeon-
chested’, McCabe was described, in language that recalls Beale, as
a ‘blend of slug, toad, and Fatty Arbuckle’.3 Like Beale, he was
older than his Othello (the text here was altered to make him speak
of his ‘ﬁve times seven years’, 1.3.304–5), and full of ‘the instinct-
ive misogyny that comes from a lifetime spent in a military envir-
onment’.4 His pathological ‘contempt for women, [and] distaste for
physical contact’ became particularly obvious ‘when his poor wife
kisse[d] him on the lips’;5 and he too took advantage of the mock-
wedding at the end of the temptation scene to suggest ‘a chilling . .
. homoerotic current [between Iago and Othello] as they kneel
almost mouth to mouth and become blood brothers’.6 He also fol-
lowed Beale’s example in the way he exploited the comic conven-
tions of his role to endow Iago with a ‘disconcerting knack of
turning the audience into his co-conspirators’—even as they were
again made to feel that ‘inside this uncannily contained fat man,
there [was] a thin, violent psychopath trying to get out’.7
   Although Ray Fearon’s Moor—hailed as the ﬁrst ‘real black
Othello’ to appear on the Stratford main stage since Robeson—

  1
    Peter, Sunday Times; Clapp, Independent; Alistair Macaulay, Financial Times,
18 Sept. 1997.
  2
    Daily Mail, 18 Sept. 1997.
  3
    Charles Spencer, Telegraph, 10 Jan. 2000; Michael Billington, Guardian, 7 Jan.
2000; Benedict Nightingale, The Times, 11 Jan. 2000.
  4
    Potter, p. 208; Billington, Guardian.
  5
    Nightingale, The Times.
  6
    Nicholas de Jongh, Evening Standard, 22 Apr. 1999.
  7
    Spencer, Telegraph; Paul Taylor, Independent, 10 Jan. 2000.

                                       99
                                   Introduction

received generally more sympathetic notices than Harewood, the
problem with Attenborough’s production was essentially the same
as with Mendes’s, and with so many twentieth-century Othellos—
that the audience’s response to the hero was fatally distorted by
Iago. So ‘aggressively unappealing’ did McCabe appear that it was
hard to account for the trust reposed in him by his general, making
one reviewer ‘feel . . . like shouting out and telling Othello what a
blind duped ass he is’.1 By the time it reached London, Fearon’s
performance was enough to persuade Michael Billington that now
the central action offered ‘a thrilling contest of equal forces rather
than a lopsided bullﬁght’; nevertheless most critics reckoned this
Othello to be too young and vocally inexperienced to match the vir-
tuoso performance of his opponent. Moreover the disproportionate
space devoted to McCabe’s Iago in nearly all reviews left little doubt
that this had once again become Iago’s play.2

Desdemona Although the performance history of Othello over the
last hundred years illustrates a growing difﬁculty in protecting the
hero from his rival’s tendency to usurp the central position, direc-
tors and actors have nevertheless made progress, especially in the
latter part of the twentieth century, towards establishing a better
balance between the competing sets of relationships around which
the action revolves. If, as a result of both changed acting styles and
new socio-political constraints, the part of Othello seems to have
become increasingly inaccessible, then the roles of Desdemona and
the other female characters have been signiﬁcantly opened up
by the advent of feminist approaches—in the theatre as much as in
the study. At the beginning of the play’s theatrical life, it was the
spectacle of ‘Desdemona, slain in our presence by her husband’
that possessed Henry Jackson’s imagination; and whatever dra-
matic capital Shakespeare may elsewhere have made by sophisti-
cated reminders that his female characters were all in fact young
males, for Jackson the illusion seems to have been complete, since
his language implies no distinction between performer and role.
Moreover, his use of the phrase illa Desdemona (‘that Desdemona’)
seems to suggest that the heroine had become one of the more

  1
     Nightingale, The Times; Spencer, Telegraph.
  2
     De Jongh, Evening Standard; Billington, Guardian; Nick Curtis, Evening Standard,
7 Jan. 2000.

                                        100
                                     Introduction

renowned characters on the early Jacobean stage.1 At the end of
the century, the murder scene could still produce open exhibitions
of distress from spectators like Pepys’s ‘pretty lady [who] called
out to see Desdemona smothered’;2 however, Thomas Rymer
appeared to be in little doubt that the real heart of the action lay in
the relationship between Othello and Iago. In his castigation of the
tragedy, the ‘poor chicken’ Desdemona is mocked for her credul-
ity and for the passivity of her response to Othello’s volleys of
‘scoundrel ﬁlthy language’: ‘[w]ith us a tinker’s trull would be
nettled, would repartee with more spirit, and not appear so void
of spleen’.3 As a risible ‘black swan’ Desdemona participates in
the general impossibility of the design,4 but her function in the
male-dominated drama of the Moor and his envious subordinate
is conceived as a largely instrumental one.
   In the eighteenth century Desdemona’s role was signiﬁcantly
weakened by a number of cuts aimed at purging the women’s
speech of impropriety: the effect was to minimize her early inde-
pendence of spirit, and to remove all evidence of her frank and
innocent sensuality—the very things that can make her so attrac-
tive to a modern audience. For nearly two hundred years, it became
customary for English stages to omit most (if not all) of Act 4,
Scene 3. Since the nostalgic sentiment of the Willow Song episode
might seem perfectly calculated to appeal to popular taste in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the excision is at ﬁrst glance
puzzling.5 It is usually attributed to anxiety about the episode’s
potential effect on the pace of the tragic action; but Rymer’s sar-
castic dismissal of what he saw as ‘a ﬁlthy sort of pastoral scene,
where the wedding sheets and Song of Willow . . . are not the
least moving things in this entertainment’,6 suggests that de-
corum was the real motive: the mildly bawdy tone of the women’s

   1
     Lois Potter (p. 5) thinks it ‘more likely’ that the wording refers to the fame of the
boy actor involved; but the whole sentence suggests Jackson’s complete imaginative
submission to the pathos of wife-murder.
   2
     Cited in Rosenberg, p. 19.
   3
     Rymer, pp. 130–1.
   4
     Rymer, p. 140.
   5
     Educated taste, in the Augustan period at least, was another matter: Francis
Gentleman derided this as a ‘triﬂing’ scene, dismissing Desdemona’s song as a ‘lam-
entable ditty’ better calculated to make the audience laugh than weep (p. 146; cited
in Potter, p. 16).
   6
     Rymer, pp. 135–6.

                                          101
                                   Introduction

conversation, and the subversive proto-feminism of Emilia’s dia-
tribe against husbands were felt to be improper, and to compromise
the self-sacriﬁcial saintliness attributed to the heroine.1
   While a different tradition developed on the Continent, where a
moralizing emphasis on Desdemona’s transgressive deﬁance of her
father made the character seem stronger and more complex—even
if less admirable—the English approach to the heroine in this
period was unremittingly sentimental.2 Pathos was so monoton-
ously the keynote of eighteenth-century and Victorian Desde-
monas that, while an actress with the dignity and emotional
strength of Sarah Siddons could make something of it, the part was
usually felt to offer fewer opportunities than that of Emilia, which
was sometimes given higher billing. In 1770 Francis Gentleman
thought that Emilia, with her ‘well-contrasted spirit’, showed
‘much more life than her mistress’;3 and in 1845 Charlotte Cush-
man’s Emilia reputedly upstaged even Edwin Forrest’s powerful
Othello in the play’s last scene.4 Macready went so far as to warn
Fanny Kemble that ‘there is absolutely nothing to be done with [the
part of Desdemona], nothing; nobody can produce an effect in it;
and really, Emilia’s last scene can be made a great deal more of. I
could understand your playing that, but not Desdemona.’5 Unfazed
by this dismal prognosis—though she herself had scorned Eliza
O’Neill’s Desdemona as ‘expressly devised for a representative
victim . . . the very beau ideal of feminine weakness’6—Kemble
took the role, investing the heroine’s death scene with new power
by eschewing both the ‘wonderful equanimity’ of previous English
Desdemonas and the extreme terror of their Italian counterparts in
favour of ﬁerce resistance: ‘I think I shall make a desperate ﬁght
of it,’ she had promised, ‘for I feel horribly at the idea of being


   1
     See Rosenberg, pp. 25–6, 52–3, 135–40; Potter, pp. 49–56; Hankey, pp. 50–2.
Though Irving brieﬂy reinstated the scene in 1876, it was not until Ellen Terry’s per-
formance in 1898 that the scene came back to stay—and even then Emilia’s denun-
ciation of husbands continued to be cut for some time (Potter, pp. 53–4).
   2
     See Potter, pp. 57–67.
   3
     Gentleman, p. 154, cited in Potter, p. 50.
   4
     Potter, p. 52.
   5
     Frances Kemble, Records of Later Life (1882), pp. 111, 380, cited in Rosenberg,
p. 135.
   6
     Frances Kemble, Records of a Girlhood (New York, 1882), pp. 195–6, cited in Pot-
ter, p. 50.

                                        102
                                Introduction

murdered in my bed.’1 Macready’s principal leading lady, Helen
Faucit, who also fought for her life in the murder scene, was
equally adamant about the heroine’s moral and emotional
strength: in her reﬂections On Some of Shakespeare’s Female Charac-
ters (1885), she mounted a spirited defence of the character against
the charge that she is ‘a merely amiable, simple yielding creature’,
insisting that Desdemona is ‘in all things worthy to be a hero’s
bride’.2 Between them, Kemble and Faucit helped prepare the way
for the great late-Victorian Desdemona of Ellen Terry, who played
opposite Booth and Irving in 1881. Although she continued to
stress the heroine’s purity and the pathos of her blind adoration
and undeserved suffering, Terry emphasized the resilience of her
character. Scorning the mistaken notion that ‘Desdemona is a
ninny, a pathetic ﬁgure chieﬂy because she is half-baked’, and
rejecting the consequent habit of casting ‘an actress of the dolly
type, a pretty young thing with a vapid, innocent expression’,
Terry insisted that ‘a great tragic actress, with a strong personality
and a strong method is far better suited to [the part], for Desde-
mona is strong, not weak. . . . by nature she is unconventional’.
Once this was understood, then Othello himself would seem less
absurdly credulous: ‘Othello’s doubts that she is chaste are usually
made to seem absolutely monstrous in the theatre, because Desde-
mona’s unconventionality is ignored. She is not at all prim and
demure; on the contrary, she is genially expressive, the kind of
woman who being devoid of coquetry behaves as she feels.’3
   Such interventions, however, appear to have had little effect on
the habitually saccharine treatment of the heroine. ‘Poor Desde-
mona, if she has a fault it is that she is too passive, too unsuspect-
ing’, lamented the Stratford Herald in 1907, praising one Evelyn
Millard as perfectly suited to a role which the reviewer saw as
requiring ‘an actress of womanly gentleness and tenderness—a
generous, romantic creature, full of kindness’.4 This indeed was
exactly how Bradley envisaged the heroine: ‘Desdemona is help-
lessly passive. She can do nothing whatever. She cannot retaliate


  1
    Ibid, p. 368, in Rosenberg, pp. 136–7.
  2
    Cited in Rosenberg, p. 137.
  3
    Ellen Terry, Dramatic Opinions and Essays (New York, 1906), p. 11, cited in
Rosenberg, p. 139; cf. also Potter, p. 55.
  4
    Stratford Herald, 3 May 1907.

                                     103
                                   Introduction

even in speech; no, not even in silent feeling. . . . [her] suffering is
like that of the most loving of dumb creatures tortured without
cause by the being [s]he adores.’1
    Although the Birmingham Post evidently found the pathos of
Millard’s ‘highly lachrymose bride’ a little overdone,2 the Desde-
monas of the next ﬁve decades saw few departures from the stereo-
type: Lily Brayton (Stratford, 1911) was a ‘guileless maid, compact
of simplicity and tenderness’, Dorothy Green (Stratford, 1912) ‘the
perfection of gentleness and tenderness’, and Ethel Carrington
(Stratford, 1922, 1924) ‘a sweet Desdemona’, ‘played . . . with
engaging sweetness . . . and a pathetic wondering amazement’;
the aptly named Joyce Bland (Stratford, 1930, 1939) ‘spoke ﬁnely
. . . looked beautiful, and was a pathetic ﬁgure in the latter part of
the play’; while Dorothy Tutin (Stratford, 1961) was said to com-
bine ‘just the right childish simplicity and purity’.3 Even the great
Peggy Ashcroft alongside Robeson at the Savoy Theatre in 1930,
despite appearing ‘a little hard’, seemed to the Times critic, ‘less
interesting than Desdemona ought to be’.4 The nadir of the senti-
mentalist tradition, which reduced Desdemona to a doll-like crea-
ture of passive tenderness and goodness, was probably reached in
Orson Welles’s ﬁlm of Othello (1952), where it was mediated by a
disdainful misogyny: here Suzanne Cloutier became a ﬁgure of
almost mute suffering, stripped of many of her lines, whilst a var-
iety of other actresses dubbed her speeches, and even stood in as
doubles in a number of scenes.5 There were hints of the change to
come in Moira Lister’s performance at Stratford in 1945—‘merci-
fully no puling doll’—and in Mary Ure’s ‘attempt at a modern, spir-
ited woman’ in the 1959 Richardson/Robeson Othello;6 but it was
not until the advent of Maggie Smith as Olivier’s Old Vic bride in
1964 that a wholesale reinterpretation of the part, harking back to
Terry’s proto-feminist heroine, was attempted.


  1
     Bradley, p. 145.
  2
     Birmingham Post, 30 Apr. 1907.
   3
     Birmingham Daily Mail, 25 Apr. 1911; Stratford Herald, 9 Aug. 1912; Birming-
ham Mail, 19 Apr. 1922; Stratford Herald, 15 Apr. 1924; The Era, 30 Apr. 1930; T. C.
Worsley, Financial Times, 11 Oct. 1961.
   4
     The Times, 20 May 1930.
   5
     Potter, p. 142.
   6
     John O’London’s Weekly, 19 Apr. 1945; Potter, p. 130, and cf. J. C. Trewin, Birm-
ingham Post, 8 Apr. 1959.

                                        104
                                  Introduction

    With this actress at last, Kenneth Tynan announced, ‘[t]he milk-
sop Desdemona has been banished from this stage and a girl of real
personality and substance comes into her own. Fighting back, not
soppily “hurt”, but damned angry, she makes the conjugal battle
less one-sided and so more interesting and certainly more excit-
ing.’1 Smith’s performance was still characterized by ‘gentle gra-
ciousness and good breeding’; but when Billie Whitelaw took over
the role in the following year she projected a sensuality that gave a
striking physical charge to her relationship with Othello.2 This in
turn may have helped to colour several later readings of the part.
Thus Sarah Stephenson (Mermaid Theatre, 1971)—unfairly noto-
rious for her nakedness in the murder scene—convinced Michael
Billington that here was ‘no bloodless moppet, but a wilful, head-
strong, highly sexed girl’.3 In the RSC production that began in the
same year, Lisa Harrow, for all her apparent youth and innocence,
similarly struck Billington as ‘transforming Desdemona from the
usual spineless moppet into a headstrong sensualist, [one who],
forever wandering about the camp in nothing but a Freudian slip
. . . for once makes Othello’s suspicions plausible’.4 If Stephenson
and Harrow stressed Desdemona’s sexuality, the tough, indepen-
dent side of Maggie Smith’s characterization was developed by
Suzanne Bertish, Donald Sinden’s Desdemona in the 1979 RSC pro-
duction. Here, declared Billington, was ‘a Desdemona who seems
worth all the fuss. . . . no mimsy moppet, but a girl of guts and
courage who touchingly persists in her love for Othello, even in the
agony of rejection’; she was ‘a ﬁgure like Chaucer’s Griselde: a
woman with a limitless capacity for love and stoic fortitude’.5 B. A.
Young even found ‘a touch of Joan of Arc’ in a bride who wore a
soldier’s uniform for her arrival on besieged Cyprus.6 At the
National in 1980, Felicity Kendal was praised in much the same
terms by Milton Shulman for ‘convert[ing] the often wet Desde-
mona into a spirited, deﬁant creature’; while Sîan Thomas at the

  1
    Tynan, p. 16.
  2
    Alexander Anikst in Sovetskaya Kultura, as cited in Tynan, p. 109.
  3
    The Times, 17 Sept. 1971.
  4
    B. A. Young, Financial Times, 10 Sept. 1971; Billington, Guardian, 19 July 1972.
  5
    Billington, Guardian, 8 Aug. 1979, 15 Aug. 1980.
  6
    Young, Financial Times, 8 Aug. 1979. The director, Ronald Eyre, may have been
inﬂuenced in this detail by Sergei Yutkevich’s Russian ﬁlm (1955), whose Desde-
mona arrived in Cyprus wearing a man’s clothes.

                                       105
                              Introduction

Lyric Studio in 1984 offered ‘a Desdemona who [was neither] meek
victim [n]or bewildered waif, but the poised, well-bred and socially
artful daughter of a noble house . . . [who died] ﬁghting for her life
like a wild cat’.1
   Suzanne Bertish’s militant rendition of the woman whom Cassio
calls ‘our great captain’s captain’ (2.1.74) remained an acknow-
ledged inﬂuence on Emily Morgan’s ‘pert, spirited, rather bossy’
heroine in the Dunderdale/Quarshie production at Greenwich,
which cited Bertish’s insistence that ‘Desdemona does not have to
be weak’ in a programme note.2 But subsequent productions—
though still inﬂuenced by feminist responses to the play—have
veered back towards more vulnerable heroines. At the RSC in 1985
Niamh Cusack used humour rather than toughness as a way of
ﬂeshing out the part, discovering in Desdemona an unexpected
taste for parody.3 In Trevor Nunn’s 1989 production Imogen
Stubbs ‘ﬂirt[ed] with gusto’ and remained somewhat ‘hoydenish’
in the eyes of one reviewer; but though she ‘accept[ed] Cassio’s
attentions as her due’, she did so ‘never realizing what they might
mean to her husband’; and in her naivety she emerged once again
as a kind of ‘child-bride’, for whom Willard White’s ageing Othello
was as much ‘surrogate father’ as lover or husband.4

Emilia and Bianca Praised by Virginia Vaughan as charting a
reorientation of the tragedy away from race towards gender,
Nunn’s production gave unusual prominence to its female charac-
ters.5 Although Stubbs may not have been the most powerful of
late twentieth-century Desdemonas, Nunn made sense of her
vulnerability by stressing its relation to the general predicament
of women in a claustrophobically male-dominated world from
which they were for most practical purposes excluded. This Othello
charted the course for a series of productions in which the roles
of Emilia and Bianca were given a larger structural importance
than they had hitherto enjoyed. In the case of Emilia, this was not
entirely without precedent, since the character has always been

  1
    Shulman, Evening Standard, 21 Mar. 1980; James Fenton, Sunday Times, 30
Sept. 1984.
  2
    See also D. A. N. Jones, Sunday Telegraph, 19 Mar. 1989.
  3
    Potter, p. 166.
  4
    Maureen Paton, Daily Express, 25 Aug. 1989; Vaughan, p. 230.
  5
    Vaughan, pp. 218–20, 225–31.

                                   106
                                Introduction

important as a conduit for the emotions of the audience—her
denunciations of the Moor’s folly in the ﬁnal scene serving to
articulate their own impatience and moral indignation. It was
partly this which led to the role’s sometimes being rated above
that of Desdemona as an acting vehicle—despite the fact that
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century productions typically simpli-
ﬁed the character by cutting some of her strongest speeches,
including the great diatribe against errant husbands at the end of
Act 4. But contemporary directors have found in Iago’s treatment
of his wife a disturbing mirror for the violent misogyny into which
Othello’s relationship with Desdemona descends. For them, the key
to understanding Emilia’s marriage is to be found in Iago’s con-
temptuous sexual banter over the purloined handkerchief in Act 3,
Scene 3 (ll. 305 ff.) and in the vicious loathing exposed by the line
on which he kills her: ‘Filth, thou liest’ (5.2.230). In such pro-
ductions Emilia’s denunciation of the sexual double standards
enforced by men (4.3.81–98) is transformed from a piece of wry
worldly wisdom into the deeply personal complaint—the gender
equivalent of Shylock’s racial plea, ‘Hath not a Jew eyes?’ (Mer-
chant of Venice, 3.1.54–68). When combined with the usual prac-
tice (for which the play offers no clear warrant) of playing Emilia as
an older woman, the speech becomes an implicit testimony to years
of spousal abuse. Yet, as Ronald Eyre showed in 1979, when he put
Susan Tracy in the part, there are good reasons for creating a
‘young and comely’ Emilia, not only because it ‘lends some sub-
stance to Iago’s fantasies about her inﬁdelity’,1 but also because
her ‘’Tis not a year or two shows us a man’ (3.4.99) will then point
to an experience of sudden and recent disillusionment all too
poignantly like Desdemona’s. This was perhaps most forcefully
suggested by Janet Dale’s ‘marvellous study in rejected sexuality’ in
Terry Hands’s 1985 RSC production: in Act 3, Scene 3, her Emilia
‘canoodl[ed] her way for a ﬂeet moment into Iago’s favour with the
procured handkerchief only to ﬁnd herself spun from the embrace
[with] a truly shocking slap in the face’;2 it was a gesture that
anticipated Othello’s slapping of Desdemona two scenes later,
physically enacting the Moor’s contemptuous ‘she can turn, and
turn, and yet go on | And turn again’ (4.1.245–6).

             1
                 Michael Billington, Guardian, 8 Aug. 1979.
             2
                 Michael Coveney, Financial Times, 26 Sept. 1985.

                                     107
                                Introduction

   If the persuasions of delicacy led, in the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries, to the mutilation of Emilia’s part, they caused
Bianca’s to be excised from the play altogether. Although she was
allowed a brief appearance by Charles Fechter when he staged the
play at London’s Princess’s Theatre in 1861, it was only in the mid
twentieth century that Bianca began to be regularly reinstated;
and even then it was not until Trevor Nunn’s 1989 Othello that the
proper system of contrasts and parallels around which Shake-
speare constructed the play’s female world began to be properly
exploited. In this production Zoë Wanamaker, as a ‘tragically
neglected’ Emilia, ‘sad, watchful, and pipe-smoking’, became for
some viewers ‘the emotional centre of the play’; psychologically
(and perhaps physically) abused by her husband, she offered a dis-
concerting parallel with Desdemona’s fate as ‘a battered wife who
is violently murdered’.1 Signiﬁcantly, in Nunn’s staging it was the
dying Emilia, rather than Othello, who reached out for Desde-
mona’s hand at the end of the play.2 The gesture capitalized on the
production’s carefully crafted sense of a small community of iso-
lated and maltreated women; and this was extended through
the sympathetic handling of Bianca, played (in a witty inversion
of the whiteness indicated by her name) by the black actress
Marsha Hunt. By linking issues of race and gender, this casting
helped to suggest parallels with Othello’s situation—especially
since McKellen managed to suggest that Iago’s racial loathing
of Othello was mirrored in his disdain for Bianca’s colour, as if
blackness were as much the visible proof of her whoredom as of
the Moor’s animality. Equally important was the way in which
Cassio’s offhand exploitation of Bianca (in sharp contrast to his
courtly idealization of Desdemona) was used to expose the double
standard that permeates the entire male world of the play: contem-
ptuously dismissed as a ‘customer’ by her lover (4.1.116), Bianca
is stigmatized as a whore by Iago (5.1.115), just as Desdemona and
Emilia are each bewhored by their husbands. The cruellest irony
(Nunn emphasized) is that Emilia herself—as revealed in her
scalding dismissal of Bianca as a ‘strumpet’ (5.1.120)—has inter-
nalized male misogyny just as effectively as, in her denunciation of


          1
              Paton, Daily Express; Vaughan, pp. 219, 226, 228, 230.
          2
              Potter, p. 191.

                                     108
                                 Introduction

Othello’s blackness, she appears to have absorbed her husband’s
racial bigotry (5.2.131, 155, 162, 224).
   Like McKellen’s homosexually driven ensign, the abused Emilias
of Dale and Wanamaker seemed to mark a decisive turning point in
interpretations of the role. The parallels between Desdemona and
Emilia were once again important in Sam Mendes’s and Jude
Kelly’s 1997 productions. Mendes’s Desdemona, the ‘dainty’ Claire
Skinner, was yet another ‘child-bride’, but nearly all traces of the
hoyden had vanished in a performance that was praised as ‘deli-
cate, poised, [and] achingly generous’1—though it was sometimes
in danger of seeming anaemically genteel. Skinner’s frailty, how-
ever (unlike that of Victorian Desdemonas) seemed designed as ‘a
visible reproach to the military boisterousness that surrounds [the
women]’;2 and her vulnerability was underlined by contrast with
Maureen Beattie’s drab, ageing, but forceful Emilia, whose sturdy
Scots common sense barely disguised her hurt resentment and
frustrated longing for Iago. Like Nunn, Mendes made use of a num-
ber of devices to capitalize on the complex ironies of the play’s own
system of black/white contrasts: he dressed Desdemona in black
for the brothel scene (4.2), as if to render visible the way in which
she (like the other women of the play) had become a creature of the
corrosive misogynist fantasies fostered by Iago; and, again like
Nunn, he complicated the play’s treatment of race and gender by
casting Bianca as the dark-skinned native of a colonial outpost.
However, the point of establishing this symbolic link with both
Othello and the wife whom he denounces as a ‘black weed’ (4.2.67)
was blurred by Indira Varma’s shameless vamp. This was a woman
who seemed positively to invite the slurs laid on her, and who con-
sequently proved unable to make dramatic capital out of the out-
raged deﬁance with which Bianca responds to Iago and Emilia,
with its telling emphasis on the play’s most obsessively repeated
adjective: ‘I am no strumpet, | But of life as honest, as you that thus
| Abuse me’ (5.1.120–2).
   Although Jude Kelly’s Othello for the Washington Shakespeare
Theatre achieved most publicity for the ‘photo-negative’ casting

  1
    Susannah Clapp, Independent, 21 Sept. 1997; John Peter, Sunday Times, 21 Sept.
1997. Skinner did, however, have one moment of moving deﬁance in the brothel
scene, when she pounded Othello with her ﬁsts to bring him to his senses.
  2
    Clapp, Independent.

                                      109
                                  Introduction

that allowed Patrick Stewart to play a white Othello, it was more
notable for its resolutely feminist reading of the text than for any
new light it cast on the work’s racial themes. While acknowledging
that race was ‘obviously critical’ in the play, Kelly insisted that it was
‘chieﬂy about male paranoia and jealousy, and the violence that
comes from those things’.1 Set in a militarized Venetian empire
whose soldiers wore the combat fatigues of a contemporary Ameri-
can expeditionary force, the production once again emphasized the
isolation of women in an overwhelmingly masculine environment.
Cassio’s ﬁrst scene with Bianca was accompanied by a chorus of
leering, mocking soldiery; and at one point a female soldier in the
Cypriot ranks was nearly gang-raped by drunken Venetian troops.2
The deep-rooted misogyny of this barrack-room world was epito-
mized by Ron Canada’s Iago, a thick-set, middle aged NCO: as con-
temptuous of women as he was exaggeratedly respectful of rank, his
resentful tirades were punctuated with an overplus of obscene ges-
tures. As his wife, Franchelle Stewart-Dorn was weary from years of
physical abuse and numb from the humiliating rudeness that
marked even their public encounters. Visibly fearful for Desdemona,
she appeared too cowed to offer practical help; and during her litany
of complaint in 4.3 against the neglect and brutality of husbands
‘the air was heavy with the silence of two abused wives, each too
ashamed to conﬁde in the other’.3 So moving was her ‘haggard,
defensive’ presence that at the end of the play Stewart (like Edwin
Forrest before him) was in danger of being completely upstaged by
his Emilia.4 As Desdemona, Patrice Johnson played a conﬁdent, ﬂir-
tatious and erotically intoxicated child-bride who (in a deliberate
reversal of Olivier’s self-pleasuring stage business with the rose)
made her ﬁrst appearance showering her new husband with rose
petals; but, cut off from the social privilege that allowed her to
behave so deﬁantly in Venice, this spontaneous girl had no resources
for dealing with Othello’s inexplicable collapse into jealous frenzy.
The result, one reviewer observed, was that in the end ‘the


  1
     Interview with Nelson Pressley, Washington Times, 13 Nov. 1997.
  2
     This piece of stage-business was perhaps suggested by Suzman’s production, in
which Bianca was raped and possibly killed by Iago’s soldiers at the end of 5.1 (see
Potter, p. 186).
  3
     Potter, p. 182.
  4
     Bob Mondello, Washington City Paper, 21 Nov. 1997.

                                       110
                                  Introduction

Othello–Desdemona marriage seems so much like the Iago–Emilia
relationship that you feel an ugly syndrome has been exposed and
. . . the whole military culture . . . indicted’.1

Cassio and Roderigo The feminist reorientation of directorial
approaches to the women’s parts has had incidental consequences
for some of the minor characters. In particular, the new promin-
ence given to Bianca has made Cassio, conventionally played as a
stylish and gallant Florentine, appear a much more ambiguous,
and sometimes rather unattractive ﬁgure. Already in the Olivier
Othello, Derek Jacobi had made Iago’s resentment of this rival seem
more comprehensible by stressing Cassio’s class condescension
and evident lack of military experience;2 while John Barton’s pro-
duction turned David Calder’s ‘weak-chinned’ Lieutenant into ‘a
shouting bully’.3 More subtly, in Ronald Eyre’s version, James Lau-
renson offered a ‘gentlemanly Cassio’ whose very suaveness served
to make the audience ‘wonder how sincere his candidness really
is’.4 Tom Mannion at the RSC in 1985 was another aristocratic car-
pet knight, who ‘might have stepped from a Florentine Tatler and
[seemed] suspiciously attentive to the general’s wife’.5 Subsequent
productions have discovered a less socially conﬁdent ﬁgure: for
Trevor Nunn, Sean Baker created a lieutenant who was ‘no glam-
orous Florentine, but a hard-working, self-made man caught
between his original social class, and that of the ofﬁcers’.6 In
Mendes’s production, on the other hand, Cassio’s unease had less
to do with class than with his callow inexperience, Colin Tierney
playing him as a gawky, rather stiff young ofﬁcer with an oddly
mincing gait, entirely devoid of the ‘daily beauty’ that arouses
Iago’s envy (5.1.19).
   The one signiﬁcant character who seems to have almost entirely
escaped the effects of such directorial revisionism is Roderigo. No
one has apparently been willing to follow up the promising new

  1
    Nelson Pressley, Washington Times, 18 Nov. 1997.
  2
    Potter, pp. 149–50.
  3
    Gareth Lloyd Evans, Guardian, 10 Sept. 1971; B. A. Young, Financial Times,
10 Sept. 1971.
  4
    B. A. Young, Financial Times, 8 Aug. 1979; Gareth Lloyd Evans, Stratford Herald,
10 Aug. 1979.
  5
    Michael Billington, Guardian, 26 Sept. 1985.
  6
    Potter, p. 189.

                                       111
                                   Introduction

direction established by Paul Scoﬁeld in Tearle’s 1948 Stratford
Othello. Modifying the ‘familiar foppishness’ of the role, Scoﬁeld
found a Roderigo in whom ‘there [was] more than a hint of the
determined Elizabethan seducer, whose mouth must indeed be
closed at all costs by Iago’.1 Even the most intelligent productions
appear to ignore the obvious implications of the fact that Roderigo,
for all his weakness and folly, is Iago’s more than willing instru-
ment—not merely in the plot to discredit Othello and destroy his
marriage, but in the conspiracy to murder Cassio. He may be Iago’s
‘snipe’ or gull (1.3.374), but so too are most other characters in the
play, including Cassio and Othello himself. The lazily observed con-
vention—which makes its mark even on Ernst Honigmann’s con-
jectures about the play’s date in his edition (p. 346)—is that
Roderigo is simply a younger version of the upper-class buffoon, Sir
Andrew Aguecheek. Despite his propensity for self-pity and his ulti-
mate ineffectuality, it might make better dramatic sense to see him
as a kinsman of the aristocratic bravos who infest the streets of
Verona in Romeo and Juliet. Such an approach might help to illumi-
nate Roderigo’s function in the play’s economy of ‘place’2—the
carefully graduated, but unstable and often ﬁercely contested
arrangements of rank, ofﬁce, and service that not only give social
density to its world, but become the principal motor of its plot, and
a key to its murderous tangle of relationships. From an early mod-
ern perspective, as I will argue in the ﬁnal section of this introduc-
tion, ‘place’ might well have seemed a more important dimension
of Othello’s tragedy than ‘race’—if only because, in contrast to the
period’s confused attempts to articulate the latter, the former was
something for which it had inherited a highly sophisticated lan-
guage. However, because, for good historical reasons, race has lat-
terly become as much the preoccupation of critics and scholars as


  1
     ‘G.P.’, Manchester Guardian, 2 Aug. 1948.
  2
     Unlike his nearest social equivalent in the play, the courtly professional soldier
Cassio, Roderigo is possessed of substantial private means; as a landed gentleman
(1.3.365) who has squandered a good portion of his estate in fruitless pursuit of Des-
demona (1.1.1–3; 4.2.185–8), he represents those ‘wealthy curlèd darlings of our
nation’ (3.3.68), the native aristocrats whom Desdemona has spurned in favour of
the Moor—the ‘wheeling stranger’ whom Roderigo so despises (1.1.136). By virtue
of his secure social place, Roderigo contrasts not just with the Moorish outsider, but
with the man whose service they both seek to command—Iago, with his conspicu-
ously foreign name and rankling sense of displacement (see below, pp. 147–54).

                                         112
                                    Introduction

of Othello’s theatrical interpreters, it is to racially oriented readings
of the play that I must ﬁrst turn.


Interpretation
Reading Blackness
       If [Othello] did not begin as a play about race, then its history
       has made it one.
                                                             Ben Okri1

The issue of Othello’s race and what it might have meant to Shake-
speare’s audience ﬁrst began to attract serious scholarly attention
in the 1960s—signiﬁcantly, at about the same time as Olivier’s
controversial performance. This is not to say that colour had
been ignored by earlier critics: indeed, it had surfaced with insistent
regularity from Rymer onwards; but it was typically treated as an
embarrassing accident of the design—something to be explained
away. In the theatre, Kean’s decision to break with the tradition
of black Othellos may have been motivated partly by the wish to
make the subtleties of facial expression more visible to the audience
in the large theatres of his day, but it coincided with the objections of
critics like Charles Lamb, for whom the hero’s colour made for
‘something extremely revolting in the courtship and wedded
caresses of Othello and Desdemona’.2 The critical equivalent of
Kean’s orientalizing move is to be found in S. T. Coleridge’s cele-
brated lecture on the play, which argued that the established con-
vention of a black Othello had resulted from the ‘common error’ of
‘mistak[ing] the epithets applied by the dramatis personae to each
other, as truly descriptive of what the audience ought to see or
know’: the mere fact Othello is called ‘black’—or even that Roderigo
dubs him ‘thick-lips’ (1.1.66), and Iago ‘old black ram’, while
Brabantio sneers at his ‘sooty bosom’ (1.2.70)—does not mean that
he was ever intended to be ‘a veritable negro’.3

   1
     ‘Leaping out of Shakespeare’s Terror: Five Meditations on Othello’, in A Way of
Being Free (1997).
   2
     Lamb, quoted in Hankey, pp. 65–6.
   3
     Coleridge (ed. Raysor), i. 47. Raysor notes the possibility that this passage was a
later interpolation by H. N. Coleridge; but, stamped with S. T. Coleridge’s authority,
the argument soon became an orthodoxy—see, for example, William Winter’s
remarks in his edition of Edwin Booth’s prompt-book (Philadelphia, 1911): ‘to make

                                         113
                                   Introduction

   The pre-Romantic tradition of a negroid Moor seems to have died
harder in the American theatre, where (to take one notorious
example) the Baltimore bluestocking Mary Preston (1869), insisted
that essentially speaking ‘Othello was a white man’, and his appar-
ent blackness a mere ‘stage decoration, which my taste discards; a
fault of colour from an artistic point of view. . . . one of the few
erroneous strokes of the great master’s brush, the single blemish on
a faultless work’.1 But Coleridge and Kean between them largely
succeeded in suppressing the problem of the hero’s blackness for
the Victorians; and the new stage convention corresponded to
a gathering critical prejudice in favour of a ‘tawny’ Othello,2 which
proved remarkably difﬁcult to displace.
   In his inﬂuential 1904 lectures on the play, A. C. Bradley repudi-
ated the Victorian tradition, insisting that the early performance
history made it quite clear that Shakespeare ‘imagined Othello as a
black man, and not as a light brown one’;3 while John Dover Wil-
son, introducing the New (Cambridge) edition in 1957, declared
that Paul Robeson’s performance had ‘seemed to ﬂoodlight the
whole drama’, convincing him that ‘a Negro Othello is essential to
the play’.4 For these editors, whether one approached the problem
from the perspective of historical ﬁdelity or contemporary rele-
vance, the desirability of a black protagonist seemed indisputable.
But in spite of such determined interventions, critics have contin-
ued to question the literalness of the play’s language of colour,
drawing attention to its historical elasticity. After all, when the vil-
lain of Arden of Faversham was described by Holinshed as ‘a black
swart man’,5 the chronicler meant only that he was dark-haired
Othello a Negro is to unpoetize the character, and to deepen whatever grossness
may already subsist in the subject of the tragedy. . . . expressions of opinion are not
statements of fact—and may therefore be disregarded. The persons who call the
Moor “thick lips” and “the black Othello” are not his friends. . . . The Moor should
be painted a pale cinnamon colour, which is at once truthful and picturesque’
(p. 121).
   1
     Furness, p. 395.
   2
     For a representative sample of opinions, see Furness, pp. 389–96.
   3
     Bradley, p. 162. In a lengthy and rather tortured footnote Bradley nevertheless
conceded the virtual impossibility of representing Othello ‘as a black in our theatres
now’, suggesting that ‘the aversion of our blood . . . would overpower our imagina-
tion and sink us below not Shakespeare only but the audiences of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries’ (p. 165).
   4
     Walker, Introduction, p. x.
   5
     Raphael Holinshed, Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland (1587), p. 1062,
in M. L. Wine (ed.), The Tragedy of Master Arden of Faversham (1973), p. 148.

                                         114
                                   Introduction

and swarthy in complexion; and in describing foreign peoples,
‘black’ could refer, as occasion served, to a whole range of pheno-
types, from ‘tawny’ North Africans, like the Prince of Morocco in
The Merchant of Venice, to sub-Saharan Africans, like Aaron in Titus
Andronicus. ‘Moor’ itself was equally ﬂexible in its application:
taken to derive from the Greek mauros (mauróz, a mauróz = dark,
gloomy, obscure), and contaminated by association with moros
(mwróz = dull, stupid; Latin morus), it could serve as a ‘racial’ cat-
egory, but just as often it was used to mark religious or geographi-
cal afﬁliation—or to indicate some unstable combination of all
three. Sometimes it was conﬁned to the Arab-Berber people of the
region variously called ‘Mauretania’ or ‘Barbary’—a name that
seemed to identify Moorishness with barbarity; sometimes it might
extend (with or without the descriptors ‘white’, ‘tawny’, or ‘black’)
to all the inhabitants of Africa; but, since the North African littoral
continued to owe at least nominal allegiance to the Turkish sultan,
Moors were not easily distinguished from Turks, and (like ‘Turk’)
‘Moor’ often came to be used as a blanket term for Muslims of any
nationality. At still other times it might (like the equally promiscu-
ous term ‘Indian’) be applied to any people of colour, regardless of
geographical origin or religious afﬁliation.1 A term so accommo-
dating made no obvious distinction between, for example, the
‘negroes and blackmoors’ whose transportation from the country
the Queen ordered in 1596 and 1601, and the Arab-looking Moor-
ish ambassador who was welcomed to her court in 1600–1.2 As a
result, despite the fact that recent theatrical practice has swung
decisively towards casting black actors in the central role, a num-
ber of critics have continued to make the case for a light-skinned
‘Mauretanian’ hero. Barbara Everett, for example, has argued

   1
     See, for example, Anthony Gerard Barthelemy, Black Face, Maligned Race: The
Representation of Blacks in English Drama from Shakespeare to Southerne (Baton Rouge,
La., 1987), pp. 1–7; Emily Bartels, ‘Making More of the Moor; Aaron, Othello, and
Renaissance Refashionings of Race’, SQ 41 (1990), 432–54; Daniel J. Vitkus,
‘ “Turning Turk” in Othello: The Conversion and Damnation of the Moor’, SQ 48
(1997), 145–76; Neill, ‘ “Mulattos” ’; Ania Loomba, ‘ “Delicious Trafﬁck”: Alterity
and Exchange on Early Modern Stages’, SS 52 (1999), 201–4; and Loomba, ‘Othello
and the Racial Question’, in Shakespeare, Race, and Colonialism (Oxford, 2002),
pp. 92–3.
   2
     Jones, p. 87; Karen Newman, ‘ “And Wash the Ethiop White”: Femininity
and the Monstrous in Othello’, in Jean E. Howard and Marion F. O’Connor (eds.),
Shakespeare Reproduced: The Text in History and Ideology (New York, 1987), 143–62
(p. 158).

                                        115
                                   Introduction

that, because English acquaintance with the Moorish world had
been largely mediated through recent Spanish history, Shake-
speare was most likely to have imagined his hero as one of the light-
skinned North African Moors expelled from Spain after the
reconquista—much like the historical Leo Africanus on whom he
was partially modelled.1 In his Arden edition, Ernst Honigmann
advances a similar preference on the somewhat specious grounds
that ‘the places [Othello] names are in the Mediterranean world’,
and that familiarity with the recent Moorish embassage to Eliza-
beth’s court would have predisposed the audience to expect an
Arab-looking ﬁgure, like that in the well-known portrait of the
ambassador.2 In both cases, it might be argued, the effect is to
diminish the tragic signiﬁcance of the hero’s otherness by making
his marriage to Desdemona seem less transgressive. Julia Reinhard
Lupton, by contrast, argues that it was not colour or ‘race’ but faith
that marked the crucial divide for Shakespeare’s contemporaries:
prayers instituted by the Archbishop of Canterbury during the
Turkish siege of Malta (1565) denounced Turks and other Muslim
‘inﬁdels’ as ‘our sworn and most deadly enemies’ and referred to
the prophet Mohammed as ‘that wicked monster and damned
soul’.3 Thus, ‘whereas for the modern reader a black Othello is
more subversive, “other”, or dangerous’, Renaissance audiences
would have been more disturbed by ‘a paler Othello more closely
resembling the Turks he ﬁghts’.4

   1
     See, for example, Barbara Everett, ‘ “Spanish” Othello: The Making of Shake-
speare’s Moor’, SS 35 (1982), 101–12, repr. in Catherine Alexander and Stanley
Wells (eds.), Shakespeare and Race (Cambridge, 2000), 64–81. But for evidence of
extensive interaction between English, Turks, and Moors in the period, see Nabil
Matar, Turks, Moors and Englishmen in the Age of Discovery (New York, 1999).
   2
     Honigmann, Introduction, pp. 14–17 and ﬁg. 1; see also Bernard Harris, ‘A
Portrait of a Moor’, SS 11 (1958), repr. in Alexander and Wells (eds.), Shakespeare
and Race, 23–36. However, the public discontent that presumably motivated the
Queen’s expulsion of ‘negroes and blackmoors’ indicates that Londoners were prob-
ably equally familiar with black Africans.
   3 Vitkus, Turning Turk, p. 79.
   4
     Julia Reinhard Lupton, ‘Othello Circumcised: Shakespeare and the Pauline
Discourse of Nations’, Representations, 57 (1997), 73–89 (p. 74). In a riposte to Lup-
ton, Eric Grifﬁn maintains that Hispanic Catholicism rather than Islam was the real
bugbear for Jacobean Protestants (who dreamed of an anti-papist alliance with the
Turks and the Moors), that Iago and Roderigo are indicted as stereotypes of Spanish
racism, and that Othello’s downfall is a consequence of his conversion to Catholi-
cism (‘Un-sainting James: Or, Othello and the “Spanish Spirits” of Shakespeare’s
Globe’, Representations, 62 (1998), 52–99).

                                        116
                                    Introduction

    For the Victorians, by contrast, the great advantage of an insist-
ence upon a tawny, ‘oriental’, or ‘Arab’ hero had been that, by
minimizing Othello’s physical distinctiveness, it substantially
diminished the scandal of miscegenation, and encouraged a cul-
turally inﬂected reading of the tragedy, in which the protagonist’s
surrender to vindictive passion represents the disintegration of his
civilized Christian identity and a return to the barbaric mores of
the desert culture that spawned him. First argued by the German
critic A. W. Schlegel, this approach treated Othello’s colour simply
as a convenient token of difference—a sign of the irreducible bar-
barity concealed beneath his veneer of Venetian civilization.
Though dismissed by Bradley as ‘hopelessly un-Shakespearean’,1
this idea of the play as a tragedy of atavistic passion proved as per-
sistent as the orientalized image of the Moor with which it was
associated, achieving its most sophisticated form in F. R. Leavis’s
inﬂuential essay ‘Diabolic Intellect and the Noble Hero’ (1937);2
and it remained the governing idea of Laurence Lerner’s 1959
essay, which discovered in the play’s imagery of blackness ‘the
symbol . . . not only for evil but for going beyond the bounds of civ-
ilization’. For Lerner, Othello was ‘the story of a barbarian, who
(the pity of it) relapses’ and yields to his ‘primitive’ nature;3 and in
the theatre, as we have seen, this was the reading that continued to
inform the Dexter/Olivier production, whose ‘portrait of a primi-
tive man, at odds with the sophisticated society into which he has
forced himself, relapsing into barbarism’ could still be endorsed by
the New Cambridge editor in 1984.4 It was against this dominant
reading that the Sudanese novelist Tayeb Salih protested in his


   1
     Far from being a prey to the ‘savage passions of his Moorish blood’, Bradley
argued, Othello is ‘perfectly just’ in his self-description as ‘one not easily jealous’;
indeed ‘if anyone had told Shakespeare that no Englishman would have acted
like the Moor, and had congratulated him on the accuracy of his racial psych-
ology . . . he would have laughed’ (pp. 151–2). Signiﬁcantly G. K. Hunter felt com-
pelled to elaborate Bradley’s arguments against this line of criticism half a century
later in ‘Othello and Colour Prejudice’, pp. 159–60.
   2
     Leavis, The Common Pursuit, pp. 136–59. For Leavis the effect of Iago’s insinua-
tions is to expose the fundamental ﬂaw of the barbaric self concealed by the hero’s
self-dramatizing persona: ‘the stuff of which he is made begins at once to deterior-
ate and show itself unﬁt’ (p. 144).
   3
     Laurence Lerner, ‘The Machiavel and the Moor’, Essays in Criticism, 9 (1959),
339–60 (p. 360).
   4
     Sanders, Introduction, p. 47.

                                         117
                                  Introduction

reworking of the Othello story, Season of Migration to the North
(1969), where Mustafa Sa’eed, on trial for the murder of his white
mistress, refuses to be judged as a latter-day Moor: ‘Othello’, he
declares, ‘was a lie.’1
   Despite an avoidance of explicit racial categories, the assump-
tions underlying the culturally based approach to Othello’s differ-
ence were frequently exposed by appeals to the essentialism of
‘blood’;2 and at certain points this approach becomes difﬁcult to
distinguish from the views of critics like Bradley and M. R. Ridley,
with their insistence on a black Othello. Whilst Bradley maintained
that ‘in regard to the essentials of his character [Othello’s race] is
not important’, his emphasis on the hero’s ‘simple’, emotion-
driven character3 is disquietingly close to the racial stereotypes
that surface more obviously in Ridley’s now notorious Arden intro-
duction (1958). Ridley concurred with Bradley’s insistence on the
historicity of a black Othello. He shared the latter’s doubts about
the acceptability of such a ﬁgure for modern audiences; but
(bizarrely enough) maintained that prejudice against the idea of a
Negro protagonist resulted from ‘a confusion of colour with con-
tour . . . the woolly hair, thick lips, round skull, [and] blunt fea-
tures . . . of the traditional nigger minstrel’. ‘That a man is black in
colour’, he concluded, in a painfully revealing turn of phrase, ‘is
no reason why he should look, even to European eyes, sub-
human.’4 But while Ridley’s ideal Othello might look like a black
Julius Caesar, he nevertheless conformed to the familiar colonial
stereotype of the simple, child-like African, a creature governed by
instinct, rather than reason:
his intellectual power is nowhere near on a par with his other qualities.
Whenever he thinks he is a child, and not even a very intelligent child. . . .
if I were challenged to produce a ‘theme’ for Othello I should suggest ‘Rea-
son versus instinct.’ Whenever Othello trusts his instinct he is almost



  1
     Salih, Season of Migration, p. 95 (see p. 13, n. 3).
  2
     See, for example, the notes on the character of Othello in James H. Taylor’s
manuscript study book for Othello (Harvard Theatre Collection, Othello 293): ‘It
is only when he quits [his civilized, Venetian] character and loses all control over
himself that his African blood boils over and consumes him. It is then that his pas-
sions, hitherto kept in order, rise up in rebellion against him.’
   3
     Bradley, p. 152.
   4
     Ridley, Introduction, p. li.

                                       118
                                 Introduction

invariably right . . . whenever he thinks, or fancies himself to be thinking,
he is almost invariably wrong.1

   Faced by judgements of this kind, readers may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
separate the critic’s unconscious racism from prejudices embedded
in the play itself; and the effort of a great deal of recent criticism
has been to resolve the issue by relocating Othello in the nexus of
ideas about colour to which it historically belonged. If Olivier’s
Moor preserved the nineteenth-century conception of Othello as
a relapsing savage, his exploitation of strikingly contemporary
stereotypes of blackness also helped to stimulate serious debate
about the signiﬁcance of race in the play; and Dexter’s production
was quickly followed by two critical works that constituted the ﬁrst
systematic attempts to historicize the play’s language of colour—
Eldred Durosimi Jones’s pioneering study of early modern repre-
sentations of Africans, Othello’s Countrymen (1965), and G. K.
Hunter’s inﬂuential British Academy Shakespeare Lecture on ‘Oth-
ello and Colour Prejudice’ (1967). Jones sought to illuminate the
characterization of Othello and other stage Moors by examining
the overwhelmingly pejorative accounts of black Africans in con-
temporary travel literature and the plays that capitalized on it.
Hunter, on the other hand, was more interested in the pervasive
strands of Christian symbolism that associated blackness with sin,
death, animality, and sexual depravity. But they were agreed in
believing that part of the power of Shakespeare’s tragedy lay in its
challenge to received stereotypes.
   Jones saw the play as constructed on a ‘double antithesis’: the
protagonist is visibly a black Moor, but exhibits the heroic virtues
conventionally associated with North African ‘white Moors’; thus
the same apparent contradiction
between what Iago is supposed to be and what he is . . . also occurs in
Shakespeare’s portrayal of Othello. He is taken (by some of the characters)
as the manifestation of a type—barbarous Moor, bondslave, pagan—and
he turns out to be noble, Christian, if somewhat naïve. . . . Iago is both
soldier and villain; Othello is both Moor and noble hero. (p. 108)

Hunter likewise stressed the way in which Othello’s character con-
founds the theological associations of blackness on which Iago


                        1
                            Ridley, Introduction, p. liv.

                                       119
                                   Introduction

plays; he argued that Shakespeare was able to ‘superimpose . . .
new valuations on the audience’ by drawing on a second evangeli-
cal tradition, according to which faith could transform the children
of darkness into the children of light (pp. 152–3). ‘It is not for us to
regard the skin, but the soul’, the Stuart divine Joseph Hall had
written, in terms recalling both Desdemona and the Duke.
If [the soul] be innocent, pure, holy, the blots of an outside cannot set us
off from the love of him who hath said Behold, thou art fair, my Sister, my
Spouse; if [it] be foul and black, it is not in the power of an angelical bright-
ness of our hide, to make us other than a loathsome eye-sore to the
almighty.1

‘Foul’ (1.2.62, 73; 1.3.118) is the adjective that repeatedly attaches
to the man whom Emilia denounces as a ‘blacker devil’ (5.2.131);
and ‘fair devil’ (3.3.478) is the oxymoron that Othello himself coins
to characterize the wife whom Emilia calls an ‘angel’ (5.2.131); but
it proves to be the ‘honest’ Iago whose white skin conceals the
inward foulness of a ‘demi-devil’ (5.2.299).2
   Martin Orkin’s important essay ‘Othello and the “Plain Face” of
Racism’ (1987) reaches a similar conclusion.3 Orkin was concerned
to expose the way in which ‘racist mythology inscribes critical
responses to the play’, thereby supporting the institutionalized
practice of regimes like that which then prevailed under the
doctrine of apartheid in South Africa. He acknowledges the pres-
ence of ‘racist sentiment’ in the play, but argues that because it is
largely conﬁned to characters like Iago, Roderigo, and Brabantio,
whom the action thoroughly discredits, Shakespeare himself is vin-
dicated: ‘in its ﬁne scrutiny of the mechanisms underlying Iago’s
use of racism, and in its rejection of human pigmentation as a
means of identifying human worth, the play, as it always has done,
continues to oppose racism’ (p. 188).


  1
     Joseph Hall, Occasional Meditations (1630), cited in Hunter, p. 153.
  2
     For a dazzling psychoanalytic exploration of the chiastic relation between
Othello and Iago, see Janet Adelman, ‘Iago’s Alter Ego: Race as Projection in
Othello’, SQ 48 (1997), 125–44: ‘in Othello’s black skin Iago ﬁnds a fortuitous exter-
nal sign [or] container for the internal blackness that he would project outward, the
dark baby that hell and night must bring into the world’s light; emptying himself
out, Iago can project his faecal baby into Othello, blackening him with his own inner
waste’ (p. 141).
  3
     See above, p. 63, n. 2.

                                        120
                               Introduction

   Others have been rather less sanguine. Passionately as Orkin’s
case is argued, it suffers from two weaknesses: in the ﬁrst place it
fails to explain why so many critics, whose good faith he does not
wish to impugn, should have been seduced into dangerous mis-
reading; and in the second, it is (like many other contributions to
this debate) founded on assumptions about the transhistorical sig-
niﬁcance of ‘race’ that are open to signiﬁcant question. In fact even
G. K. Hunter had had misgivings about the extent to which audi-
ences could escape the mesmerizing inﬂuence of Iago’s bigotry:
because the ensign is able to exploit attitudes that are still current
in ‘the society to which we belong’, Hunter argued, it is all too easy
for his perspective to impose itself on the spectators, just as it does
on characters in the play—not least the protagonist himself:
indeed ‘[t]he imposition of Iago’s vulgar prejudices on Othello . . .
is so successful that it takes over not only Othello but almost all the
critics’. Even if we partially resist Iago’s seductions we will never-
theless ﬁnd it difﬁcult to escape them altogether, since
[o]ur involvement in prejudice gives us a double focus on [Othello’s] real-
ity. We admire him . . . but we are aware of the difﬁculty of sustaining
that vision of the golden world of poetry; and this is so because we feel the
disproportion and the difﬁculty of his social life and of his marriage (as a
social act). (p. 163)

Hunter’s essay thus moves, however hesitantly, beyond the liberal
bardolatory that led to Jones’s and Orkin’s comforting conclusions
about the play, edging towards an uneasy recognition of the ways
in which Othello may be implicated (and even implicate its audi-
ence) in the very prejudices we would like it to oppose.
   Jack D’Amico’s study of The Moor in English Renaissance Drama
(1991) supports Orkin in arguing that Shakespeare invoked the
negative stereotypes of the passion-driven, bestial, diabolic black
man, only to confound them by appealing to the contrary stereo-
type of the noble tawny Moor; but he nevertheless sees Othello as
ultimately debasing himself by submitting to the role that Iago
foists on to him: ‘To those in the audience who would await a
return to his barbarous self, the altered behaviour merely conﬁrms
what the black visage promised, as the seemingly noble Moor
becomes . . . the incoherent savage. . . . The ﬁnal paradox is that
Othello is like everyone (particularly the European spectators) in
his readiness to accept the negative, oversimpliﬁed stereotype of
                                    121
                                     Introduction

himself.’1 For Anthony Barthelemy this ‘tragic relapse to the
stereotypical Moor’ is tantamount to surrender on the play’s part,
ensuring that the audience’s sympathy for Othello is only ‘sympa-
thy for his struggle to escape his fate, not sympathy for what he is
fated [by his colour] to be’.2
   In an inﬂuential essay published in the same year as Orkin’s,
Karen Newman discovers a similar ambivalence in the play:
although Shakespeare’s sympathetic treatment of a black pro-
tagonist and his transgressive spouse ‘stands in a contestatory
relation to the hegemonic ideologies of race and gender in early
modern England’, Shakespeare nevertheless presents Othello as
‘both monster and hero. . . . a monster in the Renaissance sense of
the word, a deformed creature like the hermaphrodites and other
strange spectacles which so fascinated the early modern imagina-
tion’.3 The African American critic Arthur Little likewise ﬁnds the
play ‘daring in its social critique’, but insists that Othello after all
‘becomes in effect the ﬁrst black rapist [violating] white woman-
hood’.4 In the light of these conﬂicted responses, it is hardly sur-
prising that Virginia Vaughan, observing the way in which
‘Shakespeare plays with us throughout Othello, exploiting stereo-
types, arousing expectations, alternately fulﬁlling and frustrating
our preconceptions’, should conclude that the play’s attitude to
race is ultimately undecidable:
I think this play is racist, and I think it is not. But Othello’s example shows
me that if I insist on resolving the contradiction, I will forge only lies and


   1
     Jack D’Amico, The Moor in English Renaissance Drama (Tampa, Fla., 1991),
pp. 177, 195–6.
   2
     Anthony Gerard Barthelemy, ‘Ethiops Washed White: Moors of the Nonvil-
lainous Type’, in Barthelemy (ed.), Critical Essays on Shakespeare’s ‘Othello’ (New
York, 1994), 91–103 (pp. 102, 100)—excerpted from Barthelemy, Black Face,
Maligned Race. A comparable position had been argued, albeit a little less forth-
rightly, in K. W. Evans, ‘The Racial Factor in Othello’, Shakespeare Studies, 5 (1969),
124–40. Vitkus, though he is interested in the Moor as an Islamic rather than a
black African ﬁgure, reaches a similar conclusion: ‘A baptized Moor turned Turk,
Othello is “doubly damned” for his backsliding. . . . He has “traduced” the state of
Venice and converted to the black Muslim Other. . . . His identity as “the noble
Moor of Venice” dissolves as he reverts to the identity of the black devil, and exhibits
the worst features of the stereotypical Moor or Turk—jealousy, violence, cruelty,
frustrated lust, faithlessness, lawlessness, joylessness’ (‘ “Turning Turk” ’, p. 176).
   3
     Newman, ‘Femininity and the Monstrous’, pp. 157, 152–3.
   4
     Arthur L. Little Jr., Shakespeare Jungle Fever: National-Imperial Re-visions of Race,
Rape and Sacriﬁce (Stanford, Calif., 2000), p. 92.

                                          122
                                  Introduction

distortions. . . . the discourse of racial difference is inescapably embedded
in this play just as it was embedded in Shakespeare’s culture and our own.1

It may be, however, that Vaughan’s bafﬂement can partly be
explained by reference to her apparent belief that our own culture
and Shakespeare’s participate in a single ‘discourse of racial differ-
ence’. This, clearly, is the supposition that underlies theatrical
approaches like Suzman’s which insist on the contemporary rele-
vance of the play, as well as the politically engaged criticism of
Orkin and others. But current historicist work, inﬂuenced as it has
been by the sceptical methodology of Foucault, has tended to be
suspicious of transhistorical continuities which, at their crudest,
can appear to license the grossly simpliﬁed readings that assume
the identical nature of Othello’s and O. J. Simpson’s predicaments
in a world where ‘nothing has changed’.2
   If nothing else, it is important to recognize that the entire lan-
guage of ethnic difference has been transformed in the intervening
centuries: the simple fact that neither ‘racism’ nor any equivalent
term was available to Shakespeare—while ‘race’ itself was a term
whose connotations had more to do with lineage than with bio-
logy3—means that such things were apprehended differently.
Where nineteenth- and twentieth-century racial thought was gov-
erned by ‘scientiﬁc’ principles of categorization and Darwinian
hierarchy, Renaissance ideas of human difference were ‘ﬂuid,
multiform and complex’;4 and this was perhaps especially true of

   1
     Vaughan, pp. 69, 70. Vaughan’s discussion of the cultural history of ‘race’
is usefully ampliﬁed in Alden T. Vaughan and Virginia Mason Vaughan, ‘Before
Othello: Elizabethan Representations of Sub-Saharan Africans’, William and Mary
Quarterly, 3rd ser., 54 (1997), 19–44.
   2
     Journalists were quick to cite psychiatric ‘experts’ who detected in Simpson’s
crime an expression of an ‘Othello syndrome’. The malign power of Shakespeare’s
tragedy as a mythic template for the relationship between black men and white
women is variously interrogated by Tayeb Salih (Season of Migration to the North),
Salman Rushdie (Fury), and in Manawa Taua—see above, p. 13, n. 3.
   3
     Kim Hall, Things of Darkness: Economies of Race and Gender in Early Modern Eng-
land (Ithaca, NY, 1995); Margo Hendricks, ‘Civility, Barbarism, and Aphra Behn’s
The Widow Ranter’, and Linda Boose, ‘ “The Getting of a Lawful Race”: Racial Dis-
course in early modern England and the unrepresentable black woman’, both in
Hendricks and Patricia Parker (eds.), Women, ‘Race’, and Writing in the Early Modern
Period (1994), 225–39, 35–54; and Hendricks, ‘Surveying “race” in Shakespeare’, in
Alexander and Wells (eds.), Shakespeare and Race, 1–22 (pp. 15–20).
   4
     Kim F. Hall, ‘Othello and the Problem of Blackness’, in Richard Dutton and
Jean F. Howard, A Companion to Shakespeare’s Works: The Tragedies (Oxford,
2003), 357–74 (p. 364).

                                       123
                                  Introduction

England, whose limited and hesitant steps towards the establish-
ment of an overseas empire meant that there was as yet no pressing
necessity to develop a coherent ideology of ethnic difference. In
Spain—the country to which Iago’s name appears to link him—
anxieties about the loyalty of Moorish and Jewish subjects in the
aftermath of the reconquista had led to an obsession with ‘purity of
blood’ (liempeza de sangre), while the moral and economic pressures
of New World exploitation had produced a serious theological
debate about the boundaries of the ‘human’, in which the liberal
inclusiveness of Las Casas was pitched against Sepulveda’s neo-
Aristotelian arguments for the innately slavish character of sub-
jected peoples. But in England such issues were less urgent until,
towards the end of the seventeenth century, the expansion of
North American and Caribbean colonial enterprise—together with
the full-scale involvement in the Atlantic slave trade with which it
was associated—encouraged the development of an enabling the-
ory of racial inferiority. By the 1680s, the Barbadian evangelist
Morgan Godwyn could claim that the ‘two words Negro and Slave
[have] by custom grown homogeneous and convertible’1—articu-
lating the assumption that would underlie Thomas Rymer’s
famously dismissive account of Othello a decade later: ‘With us a
blackamoor might rise to be a trumpeter, but Shakespeare would
not have him less than a Lieutenant-General. With us a Moor
might marry some little drab, or small-coal wench: Shakespeare
would provide him the daughter and kin of some great lord, or
privy-councillor.’2 But for Shakespeare and his contemporaries,
the relationship between ethnicity and subordination was by no
means clear; and Iago’s continuing hints that there is something
recognizably unnatural about the vesting of authority in the Moor
are seemingly annulled by the Duke’s public show of respect, and
by Montano’s deference (‘ ’tis a worthy governor’, 2.1.31).
   For modern audiences, Othello’s story of enslavement will
inevitably be coloured by the horrors of that later history; but, as
  1
     Morgan Godwyn, The Negro’s and Indians advocate (1680), p. 3, cited in Bridget
Orr, Empire on the English Stage, 1660–1714 (Cambridge, 2001), p. 21.
   2
     Rymer, pp. 91–2. Orr, however, cites the trenchant objections of Gildon (1694)
and Theobald (1733) to Rymer’s sneers, Gildon proclaiming that ‘there is no reason
in the nature of things why a Negro of equal birth and merit should not be on an
equal bottom with a German, Hollander, Frenchman etc.’, urging Shakespeare’s
‘contempt for the mere accident of their complexion’ (Miscellaneous Letters and
Essays on Several Subjects, p. 96; cited in Orr, p. 23).

                                       124
                                  Introduction

the work of Nabil Matar and Daniel Vitkus has demonstrated,
‘Moors’ were, on balance, more likely to ﬁgure in the early seven-
teenth-century English imagination as enslavers than as slaves;1
and Othello’s narrative of capture, enslavement, and ‘redemption
thence’ actually parallels the experience of many prisoners on both
sides of a Muslim–Christian conﬂict that stretched back at least to
the Crusades. As such it belongs not to the industrialized human
market place of the Atlantic triangle, but to the same Mediter-
ranean theatre of war as the Turkish invasion of Cyprus.2 In fact,
slavery bore little or no relation to discourses of ‘racial’ identity in
early modern thought; rather, it was part of a much older con-
struction of human difference in which the distinctions that mat-
tered most were not those between different ‘colours’ or ‘races’, but
those between master and servant, or between bond and free. This
does not mean that Shakespeare’s contemporaries were incapable
of attitudes that we might identify as ‘racist’; but it does mean that
we should be wary of assuming a simple equivalence between their
prejudices and our own. As Carol Neely puts it, ‘[t]he movement
towards our own consolidated conception of “race” is emergent,
but not yet completed in Othello’.3 The result, for modern readers,
is an uneasy paradox: that to talk about race in Othello is inevitably
to fall into some degree of anachronism, while to ignore it is to
efface something fundamental to the tragedy. Othello is a work that
trades in ethnic constructions that are at once misleadingly like and
confusingly unlike the twentieth-century ideas of ‘race’ to which
they are, nevertheless, recognizably ancestral.
   Just as the modern vocabulary of ‘race’ continues to be inﬂected
by the pseudo-biological thinking of the nineteenth century, so the


  1
     See Nabil Matar, Turks, Moors, and Englishmen in the Age of Discovery (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1999), chap. 2, ‘Soldiers, Pirates, Traders, and
Captives: Britons among the Muslims’, pp. 71–82; Matar, Introduction to Daniel
Vitkus, Piracy, Slavery, and Redemption: Barbary Captivity Narratives from Early
Modern England (New York, 2001), pp. 12–16; Vitkus, Turning Turk, pp. 78–9.
  2
     There is one small hint of a New World context in Othello’s reference to
encounters with ‘Cannibals’ after his redemption from slavery (1.3.143); but, as the
importation of New World material, including the anagrammatic cannibal Caliban,
into the Mediterranean world of The Tempest shows, Shakespeare could be cavalier
with such geographical niceties.
  3
     Carol Thomas Neely, ‘Circumscriptions and Unhousedness: Othello in the
Borderlands’, in Deborah Barker and Ivo Kamps (eds.), Shakespeare and Gender:
A History (1995).

                                       125
                                    Introduction

early modern language of colour was indelibly marked by biblical
symbolism and by primitive fears that associated darkness with evil
and death. Shakespeare’s treatment of Aaron, the demonic Moor
of his earliest tragedy, Titus Andronicus, capitulates almost entirely
to this reading of blackness; and it is to the same understanding of
colour that Emilia instinctively appeals when Othello confesses to
Desdemona’s murder: ‘O, the more angel she, and you the blacker
devil!’ (5.2.131). In one of the most frequently cited scriptural pas-
sages the prophet Jeremiah had used black skin as an archetypal
marker of evil: ‘Can the black Moor change his skin? or the leopard
his spots? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil’
(Jeremiah 13: 23). In this tradition blackness was not just an ana-
logical metaphor for the ingrained and indelible nature of habitual
sin, but the visible sign of sin itself. It was, moreover, strongly asso-
ciated with sexual transgression, since the origins of black skin
were supposed to lie in God’s curse upon the adulterate offspring of
Ham. So it was that the travel writer George Best, for example,
explained the colour of ‘all these black Moors which are in Africa’
as evidence of the ‘natural infection’ visited on Noah’s son Ham
after he ﬂouted his father’s prohibition against copulation in the
Ark: ‘God would a son should be born [to him] whose name was
Chus, who, not only [him]self, but all his posterity after him,
should be so black and loathsome, that it might remain a spectacle
of disobedience to all the world.’1 The black sins which cannot be
hidden from Jeremiah’s God are of the same character: ‘Therefore
will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear.
I have seen thy adulteries, thy neighings, the lewdness of thy
whoredom, and thine abominations’ (Jeremiah 13: 26–7). Some-
where behind Iago’s obscene characterization of Othello as a rut-
ting ‘barbary horse’, Shakespeare’s audience will have heard these
animal ‘neighings’, prompting them to identify Othello’s blackness
as the mark of an unspeakable adulteration.

  1
      George Best, in Richard Hakluyt, The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Trafﬁques,
and Discoveries of the English Nation, ed. Walter Raleigh, 12 vols. (Glasgow, 1903–5),
vii. 263–4. See also Neill, ‘ “Mulattos” ’, p. 272, and ‘Opening the Moor: Death and
Discovery in Othello’, in Issues of Death: Mortality and Identity in English Renaissance
Tragedy (Oxford, 1997), 141–67 (esp. pp. 145–8). On the motif of ‘washing the
Ethiop white’, see Newman (above p. 115, n. 2) and Jean Michel Massing, ‘From
Greek Proverb to Soap Advert: Washing the Ethiopian’, Journal of the Warburg and
Courtauld Institutes, 58 (1995), 180–201.

                                         126
                                    Introduction

   Clearly this powerful strain of biblical imagery—reinforced by a
habit of climatological and humoral theorizing that ascribed ‘hot’,
passionate temperaments to the denizens of sweltering southern
regions—helped to colour the frequent pseudo-ethnographic cari-
catures of black Africans as anarchic, passion-driven, lustful and
dangerously jealous people, closer to beasts than men. Thus, for
example, in Francis Bacon’s New Atlantis the Spirit of Fornication
itself is said to take the form of ‘a little foul ugly Ethiope’.1 It is on
stereotypes of this kind that Iago capitalizes, not just in his images
of bestial appetite, but in his stigmatization of Othello as a ‘lusty’
adulterer (2.1.286), an ‘erring Barbarian’ whose promiscuous
desires can only conﬁrm the irrational nature of a people notori-
ously ‘changeable in their wills’, i.e. sexual appetites (1.3.340–3,
348–9). But if Iago gives voice to an emerging racialism that
became increasingly dominant as the seventeenth century ad-
vanced, his were by no means the only available views. Indeed,
as Mary Floyd-Wilson has shown, the oldest and most authorita-
tive geohumoral theories were fully in accord with Desdemona’s
belief that the torrid southern climate would burn up the hot and
moist humours liable to cause jealousy, leaving the African tem-
perament cool, dry, and melancholy: ‘I think the sun where he was
born | Drew all such humours from him’ (3.4.28–9). Africans,
according to this belief, were naturally wiser, more constant, and
more restrained than Northerners whose cold environment left
them a prey to the passionate inﬂuence of hot, moist humours.2
   Moreover, the extensive travel literature of the period, while it
frequently conﬁrmed the prejudices on which Iago trades, also
offered examples of more objective ethnography. According to
some authorities, after all, dark skin was a phenomenon that could
be explained simply as an accidental effect of the sun’s burning
rays.3 Furthermore, as we have seen, there were theological tradi-
tions, founded in the Song of Songs, and bolstered by the legends of
Balthasar, Prester John, and the black St Maurice, that allowed for
a positive image of black people;4 and it is upon the paradoxical

  1
    By contrast, the Spirit of Chastity is said to have ‘the likeness of a fair beautiful
Cherubim’: Bacon, New Atlantis (1659), sig. D2v.
  2
    Mary Floyd-Wilson, English Ethnicity and Race in Early Modern Drama (Cam-
bridge, 2003), esp. Introduction, and chap. 6, ‘Othello’s Jealousy’.
  3
    See Neill, ‘ “Mulattos” ’, pp. 274–7.
  4
    See above, ‘Sources’, p. 26.

                                          127
                              Introduction

language of fair blackness fostered by these traditions that the
Duke draws when he assures Brabantio that ‘If virtue no delighted
beauty lack, | Your son-in-law is far more fair than black’
(1.3.287–8). In the secular world attitudes to black skin were also
affected by a courtly fascination with exotica that we can see
reﬂected in the bedazzled Romeo’s ﬁrst vision of Juliet: ‘she hangs
upon the cheek of night | As a rich jewel in an Ethiope’s ear’
(1.5.44–5). Encouraged by the tastes of Queen Anne, this fad
would reach its apogee in the performance of Jonson’s paired
masques of Blackness (1605) and Beauty (1608), in which the
Queen and her ladies appeared in blackface. Although the pro-
gramme of these entertainments required that these Daughters of
Niger travel to the blessed isle of Albion in order that its prince
might magically perfect their beauty by turning them white,
Ethiopia was nevertheless identiﬁed as a fount of ancient wisdom,
while Niger himself was allowed a lyrical defence of blackness that
served to validate the Queen’s choice of swarthy disguise.1
   So, although there can be no doubt that early modern culture
offered plenty of purchase for the latent bigotry that Iago success-
fully animates among the Venetians, there was nevertheless no sin-
gle explanatory template to which audiences could automatically
refer in their response to a black Moor; and the play itself is at some
pains to ensure the ﬁercely debatable signiﬁcance of the protago-
nist’s colour. Thus, while Iago’s opening slurs capitalize on the vul-
gar stereotypes of unbridled black sensuality, they are immediately
reversed when Othello and Desdemona are arraigned before the
Senate: here it is she who speaks the language of sexual passion,
boasting of the ‘downright violence’ of her feelings and openly
asserting her entitlement to ‘the rites for why I love him’ (1.3.247,
255). Othello, by contrast, is at pains to deny that ‘appetite’, ‘heat’,
or the ‘light-winged toys | Of feathered Cupid’ have any part in
determining his behaviour (ll. 259–72), and to the end insists on his
fundamentally dispassionate nature as one ‘not easily jealous’
(5.2.344). Far from being an example of the self-deception of
which Leavis and others have accused him, this claim, as well as
being consonant with mainstream geohumoral theory, is sup-


  1
    Cf. Floyd-Wilson, chap. 5, ‘Temperature and Temperance in the Masque of
Blackness’.

                                   128
                                    Introduction

ported by other characters: Lodovico, astonished by Othello’s vio-
lence in 4.1, recalls the ‘solid virtue’ and sufﬁciency of a ‘nature |
Whom passion could not shake’ (4.1.257–8); Iago himself
acknowledges his ‘constant, loving, noble nature’ (2.1.280); while
Desdemona, even after she has been subjected to his ﬁrst angry
outbursts against her, continues to believe that jealousy is alien to
her husband’s essential self. If anything, as Mary Floyd-Wilson
demonstrates, it is Iago’s brooding inferiority and habitual suspi-
ciousness that identify him with the naturally jealous tempera-
ment that the English were as likely to attribute to Italians as to
Moors (pp. 142–6).
   Moreover, if blackness was visited upon Chus and his descend-
ants as a ‘spectacle of disobedience’, a Jacobean audience would
surely have noticed that obedience is actually the virtue most con-
spicuously associated with Othello, who takes pride in his loyal
service to the Venetian state (1.2.18, 4.1.213, 5.2.338) and his
willingness to ‘obey the mandate’ (4.1.251). By contrast, it is Iago
who is cast from his ﬁrst appearance in the play as the archetypal
disobedient servant, whose rebellion mirrors that of Lucifer him-
self (1.1.42–65);1 and if Iago’s slurs work to identify Othello as a
conventional ‘black devil’, it is the ensign himself who ﬁnally
stands exposed (in the oxymoron that Othello mistakenly applies to
Desdemona) as a ‘fair devil’—thereby conﬁrming the proverbial
wisdom that ‘the white devil is worser than the black’ (Tilley D310
and cf. D231).
   Nevertheless, the history of the play’s critical reception is bound
to act as a caution against too complacent a reading of its attitudes
to colour. Othello, in Floyd-Wilson’s words, ‘stands at a crossroads
in the history of ethnological ideas’ (p. 140); and, given the extent
to which Iago’s stratagem does after all succeed in making the
Moor behave exactly as hostile stereotyping would predict, a ques-
tion remains as to whether Othello does not in some way solicit the
audience’s complicity in the very prejudices it appears to con-
demn.2 Part of the answer to that question, I will suggest, is to be

  1
     See below, pp. 164–5.
  2
     Floyd-Wilson, for example, argues that ‘the force of Iago’s hostility’ is sufﬁcient
to ‘dislodg[e] the geohumoral homologies that . . . established blackness as the sign
of wisdom and constancy’ so that ‘Desdemona’s classical knowledge gives way to a
racialized construction of Moors as passionate, lascivious, volatile, jealous savages’
(p. 158).

                                         129
                                 Introduction

found in the shocking tableau at the end of the tragedy: its display
of three dead bodies—those of a black man and two white
women—stretched out upon a bed.

‘Othello’ and Discovery
                     For now is nothing hid
                     Of what fear did restrain.
                     No secret closely done,
                     But now is uttered.
                     The text is made most plain,
                     That ﬂattery glozed upon,
                     The bed of sin revealed,
                     And all the luxury
                     That shame would have concealed.
                     The scene is broken down,
                     And all uncov’red lies.
              Samuel Daniel, The Tragedy of Cleopatra, Chorus 1
       The bed heightened private pleasure . . . but the bed could
       also be a symbol of guilt, a shadowy place, a scene of crime;
       the truth of what went on there could never be revealed.
                                               Danielle Régnier Bohler1

If we want to understand the designs that plays have on us, end-
ings, as Byron understood, are a good place to start: ‘All tragedies’,
he wrote, in a wryly reductive summary of generic convention,
‘are ﬁnished by a death, | All comedies are ended by a marriage’
(Don Juan, 3.9). Othello, however—as beﬁts a tragedy that makes
such extensive use of comic convention2—ends in strange conﬂa-
tion of the two, as the hero transforms his suicide into a symbolic
reafﬁrmation of the marital bond he has annihilated:
               I kissed thee ere I killed thee—no way but this:
               Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
                                                   (5.2.357–8)

With its extravagant literalization of the trope of erotic ‘death’,
Othello’s embrace does of course recall the kiss of mortal rapture


   1
     ‘Imagining the Self’, in Philippe Ariès and Georges Dubuy (gen. eds.), A His-
tory of Private Life, 3 vols. (Cambridge, Mass., 1987), ii. 311–93 (p. 330).
   2 See above, ‘Reception’, pp. 5–6.


                                      130
                                   Introduction

that crowns the ﬁnal scene of Romeo and Juliet: ‘Thus with a kiss
I die’ (5.3.120; and cf. 164–7). The recollection of Romeo and
Juliet, however, serves as an immediate reminder of the grotesque
indecorum of this ending. Shakespeare’s ﬁrst love-tragedy (like
his last, Antony and Cleopatra) ends where it properly should, in
a place of death—the funeral vault of the Capulets. It is only
Romeo’s fevered imagination that converts Juliet’s tomb to the
‘pallet of dim night’ where Death keeps her ‘to be his par-
amour’ (Romeo, 5.3.103–7); by contrast, Desdemona’s murder and
Othello’s suicide are performed on an actual marriage bed—the
very property at which the endings of romantic comedy conven-
tionally gesture.
    In comedy—whether the gesture is merely implicit as in
Benedick’s insistence that ‘the world must be peopled’ (Much Ado,
2.3.229–30), or explicit, as in Theseus’ repeated ‘Lovers to bed’ at
the end of A Midsummer Night’s Dream (5.1.357, 361)—the bed
remains a purely imaginary property. It is the absent site of
an always-deferred consummation by which the conventional
‘happy-ever-after’ ending proposes to keep its lovers young for ever.
In Othello, by contrast, the bed is made shockingly present, as the
locus of a marriage that appears to ﬁnd its full consummation only
in violent death. In this scene of butchery it is as if the ‘monster
. . . Too hideous to be shown’ that Othello detected lurking in
Iago’s thought (3.3.110–11) had at last taken palpable form. What
results is a spectacle that Lodovico, for reasons that he cannot
(will not? dare not?) articulate, ﬁnds unbearable, ordering the
bed-curtains to be abruptly drawn upon it.1 In a strange way this
gesture of erasure chimes with Iago’s obdurate refusal to explain
his motives, reminding us that in this tragedy the compulsion to
reveal is always matched by a longing for concealment. Thus in the
temptation scene Iago responds to Othello’s repeated demand
that he ‘Show’ the ‘horrible conceit’ ‘shut up in [his] brain’
(3.3.117–19) by insisting upon the irrefragable privacy of the hid-
den self: thought, he declares, in a mocking gibe at the new science
of anatomy,2 can never be opened up to autoptic inspection: ‘You


  1
     For a more detailed analysis of the bed motif in Othello and its relation to the
play’s racial themes, see Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’.
  2
     On the operation of this motif in the play, see Neill, ‘Opening the Moor’.

                                        131
                              Introduction

cannot, if my heart were in your hand’ (3.3.166). His last words
in the play reafﬁrm this contemptuous refusal to disclose the
secrets of his malice, even under the threat of torture: ‘Demand me
nothing: what you know, you know; | From this time forth I never
will speak word’ (5.2.301–2).
   Iago is the prime agent of the play’s drive to concealment: a com-
pulsive histrion and soliloquizer, he is like a deformed version of
Hamlet, priding himself on the possession of ‘that within which
passeth show’ (Hamlet, 1.2.85). But, like the Prince of Denmark,
Iago is also in the business of exposure—ostensibly of Desde-
mona’s sexual secrets (‘Her honour is an essence that’s not seen’,
4.1.15), but in fact of Othello’s psychic mysteries; and just as Ham-
let’s theatrical stratagem forces Claudius to confront his suppressed
guilt in the anguish of the prayer soliloquy (Hamlet, 3.3.36–72), so
Iago’s performance is designed, by opening what he calls ‘the door
of truth’ (3.3.409), to expose Othello’s inner life to the gaze of fear-
ful introspection. The Moor whom we are shown before the temp-
tation scene is a man whose identity seems so wholly invested in his
conﬁdent, slightly orotund public persona that it is almost impos-
sible to imagine him in soliloquy. But as Iago’s poisonous insinu-
ation works upon him, Othello is progressively exposed to a psychic
predation that, by the middle of this scene, drives him to agonized
self-questioning (3.3.261–80). Thenceforth he is so possessed by
the ‘bloody thoughts’ aroused in him (l. 457) that he can slide into
tormented monologue even in the midst of a conversation with
others (3.3.347–59; 4.2.47–64; 5.2.271–80).
   What Othello discovers in the murky inner space that the ensign
reveals to him is, in one sense, a ﬁctional creation: the ‘green-eyed
monster’ of jealousy simply replicates the ‘hideous monster’ that
Othello was allowed to glimpse lurking in Iago’s own psyche. What
makes its disclosure so devastating to him, however, and so
appalling to the audience, is the psychological truth enfolded in
that ﬁction. This is something at which Iago gloatingly hints when
he imagines how his poison, working with ‘a little act upon the
blood’, will begin to ‘Burn like the mines of sulphur’ (3.3.327–31).
‘Blood’ here is usually taken to mean (jealous) passion, but by
virtue of its juxtaposition with ‘burn’ it is also likely to suggest sex-
ual arousal; and of course the striking thing about Othello’s jeal-
ousy is the intensely erotic charge it gives to his language. As the

                                  132
                             Introduction

hitherto seamless surface of ‘the Moor of Venice’ begins to crack,
Othello descends into the ﬁrst of his jealous soliloquies:
                                  I had rather be a toad
                And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,
                Than keep a corner in the thing I love
                For others’ uses.
                                            (3.3.273–6)

Before long, however, that image will be transformed in a way that
thoroughly implicates him in the scene of lechery he so abhors—
the toad becoming a ﬁgure of poisonous desire, and the dungeon
itself a dank ‘corner’ of promiscuous adultery, ‘a cistern for foul
toads | To knot and gender in’ (4.2.61–2). From the moment that
he ﬁrst begins to imagine the possibility of Desdemona’s betrayal,
Othello’s speech reveals an increasingly thirsty longing to witness
the very thing he most dreads: ‘be sure thou prove my love a whore
. . . give me the ocular proof. . . . Make me to see’t . . . Would I
were satisﬁed’ (3.3.361–2, 366, 392). The archness of Iago’s dry
repetition ‘You would be satisﬁed? . . . How “satisﬁed”?’ (ll. 395–6)
highlights the way that Othello’s choice of verb implicitly confesses
to the same perverse appetite that is apparent in his cry ‘I had been
happy if the general camp, | Pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet
body’ (ll. 347–8). In these lines jealousy takes the form of a horrify-
ing desire to bewhore his own wife, one that is only barely con-
tained by the qualifying ‘So I had nothing known’, set off like an
afterthought in the next line.
    Disturbingly, this is the very desire that will seem to be gratiﬁed
by the ‘horrible fancy’ of the brothel scene (4.2), where Othello
plays the part of a customer in an exclusive bordello managed by
the bawd Emilia. Referring to the privy knowledge that belongs to
her professional ‘mystery’, he calls Emilia ‘A closet, lock, and key of
villainous secrets’ (l. 22); but the real secret laid bare in this scene
is that of Othello’s own repressed desire. This is not to say that the
Moor wishes to prostitute his wife in any literal sense—only that it
is through the jealous fantasy of her body becoming an object of
satisfaction for other men that he ﬁrst discovers the terrible depth
of his own need for her. That is what traps him in the sado-
masochistic ‘sinner’s discourse’ described by Harry Berger—a con-
dition that drives him to enlist Iago’s aid as ‘the scourge or justicer

                                  133
                                Introduction

who will help him procure the sinner’s keen and bitter pleasure of
hurting, punishing, destroying himself by hurting, punishing,
destroying what, next to himself, he most loves’.1
   This can happen, Berger suggests (following Stanley Cavell, p.
133), because the one thing Othello fears more than Desdemona’s
faithlessness is ‘her faithfulness’—the extravagant abandon of a
desire that invites an equal self-abandonment from him. For, in
stark contrast to Roderigo’s caricature of an ‘extravagant and
wheeling stranger’ (1.1.135), Othello is a man whose high sense of
himself—displayed in the cool dignity of his response to Brabantio
in the second and third scenes—depends on his conviction of a self-
mastery so absolute that it renders him immune to all extremes of
passion and appetite. Of course the touchiness he displays in repu-
diating any suggestion that his wish to take Desdemona to Cyprus
is meant ‘To please the palate of my appetite’ (1.3.259–72) might
be taken to reveal an unconscious chink in this stoic armour;
but even as he is about to plunge into the ﬁrst frenzy of jealousy,
Othello continues to take pride in the iron ‘government’ of his
emotions (3.3.260). The terrible irony of his fate is that the very
‘Chaos’ he envisages as the consequence of ceasing to love Des-
demona (3.3.93) comes upon him precisely as a result of abject
submission to that love, in the distorted form that Iago gives to it.
This psychic disintegration is what is registered in the linguistic
confusion of the speech that triggers his epileptic ﬁt:
Lie with her? Lie on her? We say ‘lie on her’ when they belie her. Lie with
her? ’Swounds, that’s fulsome! Handkerchief—confessions—handker-
chief? . . . It is not words that shakes me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips!
Is’t possible? Confess? Handkerchief? O, devil!
                                                                 (4.1.33–40)

   In the context of this collapse, Othello’s last big speech (5.2.
337–55), with its insistence on presenting him as ‘one not easily
jealous’, can be seen as a desperate attempt to restore the economy
of emotional repression enforced by his earlier ‘government’ of the
self. Taking the place of the funeral oration with which tragedy typ-
ically seeks to impose order on the chaotic spectacle of slaughter,
Othello’s apologia for his own life returns to his earlier rhetoric of

  1
    Harry Berger Jr., ‘Three’s Company: The Specter of Contaminated Intimacy in
Othello’, The Shakespearean International Yearbook (2004), 235–63.

                                     134
                                Introduction

studied self-display. Yet, as if he were conscious of the unsustain-
ability of such attitudinizing, the speech ends in the ‘bloody period’
of a self-undoing (the killing of his Turkish alter ego) that to the
horriﬁed onlookers seems to cancel its own signiﬁcance (l. 356).
Thus the ﬁnal scene of the tragedy exempliﬁes in an extreme form
the tension between secrecy and disclosure that is characteristic of
its entire action. Constructed like an elaborate play on the Aris-
totelian notion of anagnorisis (or tragic discovery), it begins by
enacting a ﬁgure of simultaneous illumination and obfuscation, as
Othello, standing torch in hand over the newly revealed bed, pre-
pares to ‘put out the light’; and it ends, just as anagnorisis seems to
have been given grimly material form in the bed’s ‘tragic loading’ of
bodies, with a ﬁnal gesture of stern erasure: ‘The object poisons
sight—| Let it be hid’ (5.2.362–4).
   The shocking force of the spectacle that Lodovico here seeks to
obliterate is registered in the extraordinary wrench that he gives
to the play’s running metaphor of poison. Hitherto (in a ﬁgure
already familiar from Hamlet) Iago’s venomous concoctions have
worked upon the ear (1.1.68; 2.3.341; 3.3.327–31); now, as if in
ﬁnal mocking response to the Moor’s repeated demands
for ‘ocular proof’, it is the eye that receives the poison; and Othello
himself, as though the ‘pestilence’ that Iago poured in his ear
had corrupted his whole being, has become the noxious centre-
piece of a scene that threatens to infect all its lookers-on—not just
the horriﬁed Venetians, but the audience, whose gaze Lodovico
directs at the corpses on the bed. The overdetermined character of
this display must have been what so impressed the imagination
of the play’s earliest witness, who could not forget the piteous
sight of the murdered Desdemona ‘lying in her bed’.1 If Johnson
and Furness found the scene unendurable,2 it nevertheless exer-
cised, as we have seen, a compulsive hold on the imagination of
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century illustrators: engraving after
engraving, uses Desdemona’s exposed body, its unconscious
invitation emphasized by the parted bed-curtains, to foreground
both the perverse eroticism of the spectacle and its suggestion of
forbidden disclosure. In George Noble’s engraving for the Boydell
Gallery, the murderer himself turns away, a hand clutched over his

                 1
                     See above, p. 1.
                 2
                     See Siemon, p. 39, and Furness, p. 300.

                                     135
                                   Introduction

eyes, as though blinded by Desdemona’s beauty and the prospect of
his crime (ﬁg. 5).1
   What makes this ﬁnal scene so unbearable is the way in which it
seems to make visible those half-occluded fantasies of sexual mon-
strosity with which the play has tormented its audience. It con-
fronts us, Stanley Cavell has argued, with the very thing ‘denied our
sight throughout the opening scene—the thing . . . that Iago takes
Othello back to again and again, retouching it for Othello’s
enchafed imagination . . . the scene of murder’.2 Beginning with
the pornographic speculation aimed at Brabantio in 1.1, Othello
works continuously to excite the scopic curiosity of its audience: if
its central action turns on Othello’s increasingly desperate demand
for ‘ocular proof’ (3.3.362), his dreadful desire to become (in Iago’s
cruelly chosen phrase) the ‘supervisor’ of his wife’s adultery, the
play arouses a similarly ambiguous longing in the audience to
‘grossly gape on’ (l. 397). The repeated frustration of this need
means that even a matter so apparently straightforward as the con-
summation of Othello’s and Desdemona’s marriage becomes
clouded by a miasma of doubt and impertinent conjecture.
   Rymer was the ﬁrst to draw attention to the uncertainty sur-
rounding the couple’s sexual relations: he complained that
although ‘the audience must suppose a great many bouts, to make
the plot operate’, the interruption of the couple’s rendezvous at the
Sagittary and the tightness of the ensuing time scheme make it
impossible for them to spend more than a single night together.3
Fastening on the same apparent inconsistencies, some recent crit-
ics have questioned whether there is time for the marriage to be
consummated at all. Othello’s conspicuous failure to answer Iago’s
nudging ‘Are you fast married?’ (1.2.11), when combined with his
later reference to the still-to-be-achieved ‘fruits’ and ‘proﬁt’ of their
love (2.3.9–10), seems to imply that their sexual union has still to
be achieved when Othello and Desdemona arrive in Cyprus; and
although Iago’s bawdy jesting with Cassio continues to evoke a


  1
     See Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’, pp. 238–40 and Figs. 8–13.
  2
     Cavell, p. 132; cf. also James L. Calderwood, The Properties of Othello (Amherst,
Mass., 1989), p. 125; and Lynda E. Boose, ‘ “Let it be hid”: The Pornographic Aes-
thetic of Shakespeare’s Othello’, in Lena Cowen Orlin (ed.), Othello: Contemporary
Critical Essays (Basingstoke, 2004), 22–48.
  3
     Rymer, p. 123. On the play’s use of so-called ‘double-time’, see above, pp. 33–6.

                                        136
                                   Introduction

scene of sexual pillage (‘he tonight hath boarded a land-carrack’,
1.2.50), his claim that Othello has ‘not yet made wanton the night
with’ Desdemona (2.3.15–16) also suggests non-consummation—
though it might mean only that they have not yet enjoyed a full
night of bliss; and in any case there is no reason to believe anything
that Iago says as he plays with Cassio’s erotic imagination. Never-
theless, when the couple’s wedded bliss is interrupted for the sec-
ond time—on this occasion by Cassio’s drunken brawling—the
audience is left with the possibility that consummation has once
again been deferred. Moreover, since (given the elastic nature of
stage time) we have no sure means of knowing how long a period
intervenes between Othello’s ‘Come away to bed’ (2.3.244) and
Cassio’s musical aubade at the beginning of 3.1, it remains possible
that physical union is never accomplished.1 That is what T. G. A.
Nelson and Charles Haines have argued in a controversial essay
that locates the hidden spring of the tragedy in the Moor’s sexual
inexperience and in the sense of impotence that is awakened in him
by his failure to conquer Desdemona’s virginity.2
   The fact of the matter remains, however, that—in default of the
explicit witness with which Shakespeare’s theatre conventionally
attested to the truth of offstage action—the question of consum-
mation remains fundamentally undecidable; and that surely is the
point. For it is this very uncertainty that encourages the habit of
prurient speculation into which the play lures its spectators—the
habit of which the Nelson and Haines’s article is itself a prime ex-
ample.3 By the same token, it is the audience’s frustrated appetite

  1
      See above, ‘Sources’, p. 33.
  2
      ‘Othello’s Unconsummated Marriage’, Essays in Criticism, 33 (1983), 1–17. In
Misrepresentations (pp. 150–1, 163–8), Graham Bradshaw, though critical of Nelson
and Haines’s literal-minded treatment of stage time, nevertheless concludes that
Othello’s tormented longing to dye the wedding-sheets with the blood of murder
(5.1.37) makes sense only if they have not yet been stained with the blood of virgin-
ity. But this is probably to attribute a logic to the Moor’s fantasy that his jealous
madness will not admit. Furthermore, as Derek Cohen has pointed out, since ‘[t]he
wedding sheets are not presumed automatically to be on the bed in preparation for a
ﬁrst use[, they] must, therefore, have been previously used so that Emilia could iden-
tify them as wedding sheets’ (Searching Shakespeare: Studies in Culture and Authority
(Toronto, 2003), p. 98).
   3
      Ironically, the same habit is revealed in Norman Nathan’s point-by-point
rebuttal of Nelson and Haines, which shares their naive assumptions about the
decidability of offstage actions—see ‘Othello’s Marriage is Consummated’, Cahiers
Élisabéthains, 34 (1988), 79–82. Oliver Parker’s decision to include in his 1995 ﬁlm a

                                        137
                                   Introduction

for certainty, paralleling the protagonist’s increasingly frantic
desire to have his suspicions ‘satisﬁed’ (3.3.392–410), that enables
Iago to act as a uniquely deceitful version of the nuntius—the nor-
mally reliable messenger-ﬁgure inherited from classical drama—
one whose obscene ﬁctions infect the imagination of the audience,
even as they colonize the minds of his victims. The result is that,
whatever our conscious minds may think about the causes of the
tragic catastrophe, its array of corpses on a brutally violated mar-
riage bed can feel like a conﬁrmation of the ensign’s grossest
insinuations—of everything that he has suggested about the adul-
terate and unnatural character of the relationship for which the
bed itself stands.1

‘Othello’ and the Monstrous Meditating on the signiﬁcance of the
ending, G. M. Matthews describes ‘a bed on which a black man and
a white girl, although they are dead, are embracing’, and discovers
in that spectacle an icon of humanist transcendence: ‘[h]uman
dignity, the play says, is indivisible.’2 That may perhaps be what
the play (for some viewers and readers at least) implies; but what it
says, as we have already observed, is something else. Where a
litany of admiration sweeps Hamlet ‘like a soldier to the stage’
(5.2.350), language appears simply confounded by Othello’s fate—
‘All that’s spoke is marred’ (5.2.356); where the bodies of Romeo
and Juliet are to be resurrected with celebratory ‘statue[s] in
pure gold’ (5.3.298), the corpses of Othello and Desdemona,
‘poison[ing] sight’, must be hurriedly shut from view. Nor is
Matthews’s description of the scene quite accurate: for, as Emilia’s
request to ‘lay me by my mistress’ side’ indicates (5.2.236), there
are not two but three bodies on the bed. Together they form a kind
of deathly ménage à trois that uneasily recalls Iago’s suspicion that
‘ ’twixt my sheets | [the Moor has] done my ofﬁce’ (1.3.376–7). It is
not, obviously, that we are meant to read the stage image as a liter-
al conﬁrmation of that claim, only that on the symbolic level it can


scene in which Othello and Desdemona are seen consummating their marriage on
the ﬁrst night constituted a particularly crass response to the voyeuristic curiosity
aroused by Shakespeare’s text.
  1
     On the social symbolism of the marriage bed in early modern culture, see
below, p. 173 and Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’, pp. 266–7.
  2
     Matthews, ‘Othello and the Dignity of Man’, p. 145 (see above, p. 63, n. 1).

                                        138
                                   Introduction

seem to taint Othello’s romantic liebestod with the mark of adulter-
ous impropriety.
   The inarticulate horror that characterizes the Venetian response
to this disturbingly improper tableau is ﬁrst expressed by Montano:
appalled by the sight of Desdemona ‘murdered in her bed’, he
exclaims against what he calls this ‘monstrous act’ (5.2.183, 187).
To the modern ear that may sound like a cliché of outrage; but
‘monstrous’ and ‘monster’ are key terms in this play, charged with
meanings that have largely dissipated in modern English:1 derived
from Latin monere (to warn), ‘monster’ originally denoted some
baneful portent or prodigy, but came to refer particularly to freaks
of nature, especially those hybrid creatures supposedly produced
by violations of the boundaries of kind. In so far as the ‘monstrous’
is deﬁned as existing beyond the proper limits of nature, it also lies
in some sense beyond the limits of rational speech, in the occluded
domain of the ‘indescribable’ or ‘unspeakable’; indeed, by virtue of
its horrible deformity that is where it is best kept, shut away. Yet—
as the popularity of fairground freak shows, the avid collection of
monstrous exhibits in Renaissance wunderkammern, and the play-
ful excesses of grotesque art all illustrate—monsters were also
objects of intense fascination in early modern culture; and the
word, linked by false etymology to monstrare (to show), came to
denote a creature that, by virtue of its very atrociousness, demand-
ed to be seen—like the ‘monster . . . Too hideous to be shown’ that
Othello detects ‘shut up in [Iago’s] brain’ (3.3.110–19).2
   Better than any other, then, ‘monstrous’ is the term that
expresses Othello’s simultaneous drives towards revelation and
concealment. Images of monstrosity crowd the play, as if spawned


   1
     See Newman, ‘Femininity and the Monstrous’, and Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’,
pp. 259–68. For a more elaborate exploration of the trope of monstrosity in the play,
see Mark Thornton Burnett, ‘ “As it is credibly thought”: Conceiving “Monsters” in
Othello’, chap. 4 of Constructing ‘Monsters’ in Shakespearean Drama and Early Modern
Culture (Basingstoke, 2002).
   2
     Patricia Parker offers brilliant discussion of the motifs of hiddenness and expo-
sure in a series of essays: ‘Shakespeare and Rhetoric: “Dilation” and “Delation” in
Othello’, in Patricia Parker and Geoffrey Hartman (eds.), Shakespeare and the Question
of Theory (New York and London, 1985), 54–174; ‘Fantasies of “Race” and “Gen-
der”: Africa, Othello, and Bringing to Light’, in Margo Hendricks and Patricia Park-
er (eds.), Women, ‘Race’, and Writing in the Early Modern Period (1994), 84–100; and
‘Othello and Hamlet; Spying, Discovery, Secret Faults’, in Parker, Shakespeare from
the Margins: Language, Culture, Context (Chicago, 1996), chap. 7.

                                        139
                                 Introduction

by the unnatural couplings that Iago imagined taking place under
the sign of the Sagittary, the man–horse hybrid that gave its name
to Othello’s and Desdemona’s lodging in Act 1.1 It is not for noth-
ing that Iago will later taunt Othello with his privy knowledge
of ‘many a civil monster’ infesting ‘many a . . . populous city’
(4.1.59–60); for he himself inhabits, to use his own felicitously
chosen phrase, a ‘monstrous world’ (3.3.379), crafted in his own
image. At the beginning of the play, the ensign stage-manages, for
Brabantio’s beneﬁt, a kind of psychic discovery scene: drawing
back the curtains of imagination he seems to expose the hidden
fantasies of his society, luridly illuminating the dark Venetian
street with a vision that uncannily resembles the dream from
which the old man has just been awakened (1.1.142). With Roderi-
go’s help, he compels Brabantio to envisage the very bedchamber
where his daughter, ‘Transported . . . To the gross clasps of a las-
civious Moor’ (ll. 124–5), is locked in bestial coition:
                Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
                Is tupping your white ewe.

. . . you’ll have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse. . . . your
daughter and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
                                                    (1.1.88–9, 110–16)

   While targeted at the paternal outrage of Brabantio, the violent
grotesquerie of the couplings envisaged here is equally calculated
to excite the imagination of the audience, turning the marriage
bed into a site of prurient speculation until the shocking moment of
its actual discovery in Act 5. For of course it is not just in the open-
ing scene that Othello goads us with the sense of something wilful-
ly ‘denied our sight’: not only do the jealous anxieties rehearsed by
Iago, Bianca, and Othello demonstrate their society’s obsession
with sexual honour as ‘an essence that’s not seen’ (4.1.15), but
the language of the play, full of allusions to beds and wedding
sheets,2 and studded with metaphors of begetting and parturition,
also stimulates a growing itch of curiosity about the absent scene of

  1
    For the centaur as a symbol of lust, barbarism, and monstrous violation of
kind, see Calderwood, pp. 22–5, 36.
  2
    For discussion of these details and the anxieties revealed by their systematic
bowdlerization in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century productions, see ‘ “Unproper
Beds” ’, pp. 240, 251–9.

                                      140
                             Introduction




 17. The Temptation Scene: Paul Robeson as Othello, José Ferrer as Iago
                 (Shubert Theatre, New York, 1943).




desire—a curiosity that is repeatedly gratiﬁed (though never, of
course, satisﬁed) by Iago’s bestial imaginings.
   It is these obscene ﬁctions that combine to form the ‘monstrous’
offspring whose birth Iago anticipates at the end of the ﬁrst act
(1.3.392–3). Self-engendered, like the jealous ‘monster’ described
by Emilia (‘Begot upon itself, born on itself’, 3.4.156–7), this is the
atrocious prodigy whose advent is foreshadowed by the ‘monstrous
mane’ of the storm that begins Act 2, and again by the ‘monstrous’
brawl that Iago engineers during the ﬁrst night on Cyprus (2.1.13,
2.3.208). It begins to emerge as the ‘green-eyed monster’ of jeal-
ousy which he conjures up in the temptation scene (3.3.169). This
is the creature which Desdemona will pray heaven to keep from
her husband’s mind (3.4.158), but which his cry of ‘monstrous!
                                  141
                                  Introduction

Monstrous!’ (3.3.428) shows to be already lodged amongst the
‘foul toads’ that ‘knot and gender’ in the fetid ‘dungeon’ of his
imagination (3.3.273–4, 4.2.61–2). In Act 5 the creature at last
takes physical shape in the form of the poisonous ‘object’ disgra-
cing the marriage bed. Othello’s hallucinated image of the planned
murder as a second perverted pregnancy—‘the strong conception |
That I do groan withal’ (5.2.57–8)—ﬁnally conﬁrms that the thing
so long ‘denied our sight’, but now about to be brought ‘to the
world’s light’ is nothing other than the ‘monstrous birth’ promised
in Iago’s annunciation (1.3.393).
   Othello and Iago not only give birth to monsters, but are them-
selves tainted by monstrosity. Possessed by the deformed imagin-
ings with which Iago has, as it were, impregnated his imagination,
Othello begins to see himself like another deformed denizen of
Iago’s menagerie—‘A hornèd man’s a monster and a beast’
(4.1.58); and Iago’s suavely ambiguous reply—‘There’s many
a beast then in a populous city, | And many a civil monster’
(4.1.59–60)—seems to conﬁrm that identiﬁcation, his arch
oxymoron implying that the Moor’s ‘civil’ veneer, unnaturally
conjoined to his bestial essence, constitutes a double violation of
nature. Yet even with her last breath, Desdemona, who professes to
know her husband’s inward self, persists in seeing her murderer as
‘my kind lord’ (5.2.125)—the extra-stressing of that carefully insis-
tent adjective pointing up the extreme irony of its application, even
as it appeals to a realm of puriﬁed emotion where Iago-like judge-
ments about the limits of ‘kind’ would appear an obscene irrele-
vance. For coolly regarded it is not the Moor but Iago himself—the
professed Venetian rather than the ‘erring stranger’—who stands
disclosed to the audience as the true ‘civil monster’ (4.1.60)1—just
as, in the play’s colour symbolism, it is the inner blackness con-
cealed by the white Iago’s ‘forms and visages of duty’ (1.1.50)
which serves to offset the fair ‘visage in his mind’ (1.3.250) that
Desdemona discovers in ‘the black Othello’; and we are invited to
discern similarly schematic ironies in the seemingly indiscriminate
application of such terms as ‘honest’ to Iago, Desdemona, and
Bianca, or ‘devil’ to Desdemona, Iago, and Othello.


   1
     This, indeed, is precisely how he is described in the ballad based on the play:
‘Iago was the monster’s name’ (see Furness, p. 399).

                                       142
                                   Introduction

    In fact, however, the play never quite allows us the detachment
necessary to render these schemata entirely secure. Instead it
taunts the audience with the possibility that (despite Desdemona’s
ﬁdelity) Iago only discovers what was always there beneath the
Moor’s civil manners, advertised by the blackness of his skin1—the
barbarous and ‘malignant’ alien whom Othello summons as his
fatal alter ego at the moment of suicide (5.2.352). The very fact that
the play’s opening scene grants Iago the structural position of a
prologue, introducing us to Othello and Desdemona, well before
they are allowed to represent themselves, gives him an inestimable
advantage in this regard: because the most lurid of his erotic fan-
tasies are placed so early in the action, the lovers can never en-
tirely escape their vile taint. In his evocation of their love-making,
the gathering imputation of something obscenely deviant in the
conjunction of black ram and white ewe, of stallion and girl, is
rhetorically conﬁrmed by the monstrous deformity of the creature
it produces—a ‘beast with two backs’. It is as if the hidden coupling
had already spawned the ‘monstrous birth’ of Iago’s fantasy; and
this is what works (at the irrational level of suggestion) to under-
write Brabantio’s insistence that his daughter’s marriage consti-
tutes a profound violation of the natural order:
                For nature so preposterously to err—
                Being not deﬁcient, blind, or lame of sense—
                Sans witchcraft could not. . . .
                                   and she—in spite of nature,
                Of years, of country, credit, everything—
                To fall in love with what she feared to look on?
                It is a judgement maimed and most imperfect
                That will confess perfection so could err
                Against all rules of nature . . .
                                             (1.3.63–5, 97–102)

The rhetorical power of this denunciation is given dramatic
emphasis by the way in which Othello himself is made to echo it, as
  1
     Kenneth Burke beautifully conveys the power of inarticulate suggestion that
Iago exploits in the play: ‘there is whispering. There is something vaguely feared
and hated. In itself it is hard to locate, being woven into the very nature of “con-
sciousness”: but by the artiﬁce of Iago it is made local. The tinge of malice vaguely
diffused through the texture of events can here be condensed into a single principle,
a devil, giving the audience as it were ﬂesh to sink their claw-thoughts in’: ‘Othello:
An Essay to Illustrate a Method’, in Susan Snyder (ed.), ‘Othello’: Critical Essays
(New York, 1988), 127–68 (p. 131).

                                         143
                              Introduction

(under Iago’s tutelage) he begins to internalize the libels of his ene-
mies. At a fatal moment in the temptation scene, prompted by
Othello’s insistence on the infallibility of ocular judgement (‘she
had eyes and chose me. . . . I’ll see before I doubt’ (3.3.192–3), Iago
reminds the Moor of Brabantio’s charges:
          She did deceive her father, marrying you;
          And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,
          She loved them most. . . .
          She that so young could give out such a seeming
          To seel her father’s eyes up, close as oak—
          He thought ’twas witchcraft!
                                                    (ll. 209–14)

   Iago’s well-timed paraphrase cunningly transfers the charge of
‘witchcraft’ from Othello to Desdemona, just as it reassigns the
imputation of blindness from the bewitched daughter to the gulled
patriarch—and therefore by implication to the deceived husband;
but it is otherwise close enough to Brabantio’s speech to remind
Othello of the paradoxical notion of ‘perfection . . . err[ing] |
Against all rules of nature’, as he begins to contemplate the possi-
bility of Desdemona’s inﬁdelity: ‘And yet how nature, erring from
itself—’ (l. 231). Othello’s conscious meaning is only that his wife
may have erred sufﬁciently from her ‘honest’ character to have
been tempted by Cassio; but the predatory swiftness of Iago’s
response, with its continuing paraphrase of Brabantio’s diatribe,
shows how carefully the rhetorical trap has been sprung: if Desde-
mona’s liaison with Othello was itself ‘unnatural’ in the ﬁrst place,
how much more probable (indeed ‘natural’) must her ‘unnatural’
adultery now appear:
            Ay, there’s the point! As—to be bold with you—
            Not to affect many proposèd matches
            Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
            Whereto we see in all things nature tends—
            Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
            Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural . . .
                                                   (ll. 232–7)

The success with which this speech appears to demonstrate a com-
pelling symmetry between Desdemona’s marriage and her neces-
sary betrayal of that marriage depends on a rhetorical sleight of
hand; but, for seventeenth-century audiences, it was underpinned
                                  144
                                   Introduction

by deep-laid cultural assumptions about the unnaturalness of cer-
tain kinds of transgressive liaison—assumptions that remain part
of the dangerous substrata of racist discourse in our own time.
   In early modern thought adultery was conceived (as the etymol-
ogy of the two words indicates) quite literally as a form of adulter-
ation: involving both pollution of a divinely sanctioned bond, and
an assault on the ‘natural’ genealogical boundaries of the family,
its monstrous character was mirrored in its bastard offspring.1
Conveniently for Iago, medieval theology had enlarged the concept
of adultery to include marriage with non-Christians—Jews, Mus-
lims, and pagans—under the rubric of ‘interpretive adultery’. In
this connection the ambiguity of ‘Moor’ as both a religious and
an ethnic category is doubly useful to the villain, since he can
also exploit the popular prejudice—still reﬂected in such locu-
tions as ‘bastard race’—that regarded any form of miscegenation
unnatural and adulterate. Thus in Ben Jonson’s Volpone, the
deformed brood of bastards who make up the protagonist’s ‘true
family’ are seen as doubly monstrous by virtue of their being
illegitimately ‘begot on . . . Gypsies, Jews, and black-moors’
(Volpone, 1.1.506–7). Iago’s language insidiously capitalizes on
these widely diffused notions, as well as on the biblical texts that
linked blackness with sexual transgression;2 but it is also energized
by ancient beliefs (going back at least to Pliny) that associated
Africa with monsters like those ‘Anthropophagi, and men whose
heads | Do grow beneath their shoulders’ whom Othello describes
in his ‘travailous history’ (1.3.139, 144–5)—creatures whose
deformity, according to the sixteenth-century writer Jean Bodin,
was to be explained by ‘promiscuous coition of men and animals’.3
It is the special triumph of the villain’s insinuations to plant the
suggestion that the Moor’s colour is the mark of such monstrosity:
thus it becomes proof of the ‘unnatural’ character of his marriage,
making Desdemona’s elopement seem like a breach of the most

  1
     In the drama bastard characters are conventionally credited with a moral mon-
strosity, that is sometimes (as in the case of Thersites, in Troilus and Cressida, for
example) mirrored in physical deformity—see Michael Neill, ‘ “In Everything Illegit-
imate”: Imagining the Bastard in English Renaissance Drama’, in Putting History to
the Question, 128–47 (esp. pp. 139–47).
   2
     See above, p. 126.
   3
     Jean Bodin, Method for the Easy Comprehension of History (1565), trans. Beatrice
Reynolds (New York, 1966). See App. F(iv).

                                        145
                                  Introduction

fundamental laws of kind; and because her marriage constitutes
an act of generic adulteration, it must inevitably spawn further
adultery, since ‘very nature will instruct her . . . to some second
choice’ (2.1.228–9).
   The disconcerting capacity of such passages to possess the im-
agination of an audience is indicated by the way in which Iago’s
language has so frequently insinuated itself into criticism of the
play, especially when it addresses issues of race. Thus Rymer,
whose irritation at the play’s generic and structural irregularities is
often hard to disentangle from his moral disgust with its fable,
denounces Othello as a ‘monstrous’ work, the ‘foul disproportion’
of whose design is only matched by the ‘thoughts unnatural’ on
which it is founded.1 Coleridge’s notorious critique pins its sense of
the play’s deformity even more explicitly to the idea of racial mésal-
liance, discovering something ‘monstrous’ in Desdemona’s love for
Othello, ‘a disproportionateness, a want of balance’; and this
response ﬁnds an unexpected echo even in G. K. Hunter’s enlight-
ened essay, when he admits to feeling ‘the disproportion . . . of
Othello’s . . . marriage (as a social act)’.2 But for Iago, of course,
‘the point’ is not at all what it is for Coleridge: eloquent as his
instinctive resentment of foreigners may make him in the coining
of racial slurs, these are only a means to what he calls his ‘peculiar
end’ (1.1.60). Indeed, one of the frightening things about Othello is
the almost casual, improvisational way in which Iago sets about
coining his disturbingly modern language of racial hatred: it is
frightening because once such a language has been invented, it
cannot readily be dis-invented. That is why the play’s involvement
in the history of racial thought has seemed such a profoundly
ambiguous matter; and it is why it is possible to imagine, with Ben
Okri, that Othello’s history may have made it into something it was
never intended to be—‘a play about race’.
   However, while modern audiences are likely to feel a particular
poignancy in the Moor’s capitulation to the idea that revulsion at
his blackness has driven Desdemona to inﬁdelity, seventeenth-
century playgoers are unlikely to have reacted so keenly; and it is
signiﬁcant that the motive crosses Othello’s mind only as a ﬂeeting
possibility—something on a par with the disparity in their ages, or

       1
           See Rymer, pp. 111, 121, 127, 145.
       2
           Coleridge (ed. Raysor), i. 47; Hunter, p. 163.

                                        146
                                 Introduction

his own want of courtly sophistication (3.3.266–9). Therefore,
although it is probably impossible—and ultimately undesirable—
to set aside our awareness of the play’s implication in the history of
‘race’, there may nevertheless be some advantage in trying to
imagine how different Othello might have felt in its own time. The
murderous resentments by which its hero is destroyed were, after
all, keyed to a world in which matters of rank, deference, and sub-
ordination were all-important, whereas nascent ideas of racial dif-
ference were of more incidental signiﬁcance.

Place, Ofﬁce, and Occupation In order to understand the social dis-
course operating in Othello, it may be helpful to put more
pressure on the language that Iago deploys to demonstrate the
‘foul disproportions’ of Desdemona’s match. When he cites her
unnatural rejection of suitors belonging to her own ‘clime, com-
plexion, and degree’, it is tempting to give his words a straightfor-
wardly racial construction, forgetting that ‘clime’ meant no more
than ‘region’, and that ‘complexion’, though it could refer to the
appearance of the skin or face, did so only as these things were
thought to reﬂect the temperament shaped by the balance of
humours in a given person’s constitution. Of course, in so far as
this balance was liable to be affected by the climate of a particular
region, such notions necessarily contributed to contemporary
understandings of racial difference—black skin being explained by
some authorities as resulting from changes in the humoral consti-
tution of the body produced by the excessive heat of the sun.1 So
colour is not exactly irrelevant here (indeed, the use of ‘foul’ to
mean ‘dirty-coloured’ maintains a current of racial innuendo to
the end of the speech); but Iago’s primary emphasis is on the
‘disproportions’ of condition between husband and wife—the
incompatibilities of origin and temperament that render Othello a
stranger to Venice, and the alleged disparity of rank that makes
Desdemona’s match what contemporaries would have called a
‘marriage of disparagement’.
   ‘Disproportions’, in Iago’s mouth, is a marvellously resonant
word: for this is a man who prides himself on the exactness of the
moral calculations for which he ‘stand[s] accountant’ (2.1.284),
and a man who understands all human qualities as belonging to a

          1
              See above, p. 127, and Commentary, 2.3.197, App. F(iv).

                                      147
                                     Introduction

zero-sum game of comparison in which another’s ‘beauty’ serves
only to make him ugly (5.1.18–20). It is proportion, after all—
deriving from the Latin pro portione (‘in respect of his share’)—that
the ‘double knavery’ of his revenge seeks to restore—whether it
involves the proprieties of military rank, or the rights of marital
‘ofﬁce’. Tellingly, it is the aggrieved sense of disproportion resulting
from the supposed usurpation of his rightful share that supplies the
theme of Iago’s ﬁrst great tirade in the play, his denunciation of
Cassio’s promotion (1.1.7–32). Harping on his own ‘price’ and
‘worth’, and bridling at his general’s indifference to the advocacy
of ‘three great ones of the city’, he denounces the wilful neglect of
both proven merit and ‘old gradation’ in the preposterous decision
that, by cheating him of the lieutenancy that was his due, has
reduced him to ‘his Moorship’s Ensign’. The key word in this
outburst—the one on which Iago’s sense of violated proportion
ﬁxes, and which provides an indispensable clue to the social ten-
sions that animate the play, is ‘place’.1
   Location in the geographical sense is obviously important in a
work whose action moves so decisively from Venice to Cyprus. In
Venice Othello the Moor and Cassio the Florentine are marked as
outsiders; in Cyprus no one is at home. Venice, admired for its
wealth, its cosmopolitan society, and its stable republican constitu-
tion, embodies the civilized order of the polis—the idealized city of
classical theory—a place where the turbulence of individual emo-
tion is subjected to the rational calm of authority. Cyprus, which
Shakespeare’s audience knew as the Venetian colony brieﬂy res-
cued from Turkish invasion by the celebrated Battle of Lepanto
(1571), is an embattled military outpost where no such predictable
sanctions obtain. The island belongs to the stormy domain of the
passions; and its distance from Venice is symbolically marked by
the ferocious tempest that opens the second act. Famous for its
mythic association with the love-goddess, Aphrodite, Cyprus is
linked in the play to the ﬁgure of Desdemona herself, subject as
she is to a kind of erotic siege that proves more dangerous than
the Turkish assault on the island to which Brabantio compares
it (1.3.209–10). Yet as a Venetian and a woman Desdemona is
as much a stranger in this male-dominated fortress as Othello


  1
      See ‘Places’; and cf. also Julia Genster, ‘Lieutenancy’ (see above, p. 32, n. 1).

                                           148
                                    Introduction

feels himself among the suave ‘chamberers’ of the metropolis
(3.3.268); and her connection with Venice allows Iago to taint her
with a different kind of eroticism altogether—one associated with
the promiscuous ‘country disposition’ of the city’s notorious cour-
tesans (3.3.204–7).
   The primary signiﬁcance of Venice, however, is that, as the
metropolitan centre of Othello’s world, it supplies (or pretends to
supply) each individual with a clearly deﬁned ‘place’ within an
established social order—this indeed is what distinguishes it
from the barbarous world beyond its boundaries, the vaguely
imagined wilderness of Othello’s past travails; and, if matters of
geographical place and displacement ﬁgure so prominently in
the play’s metaphoric structure, the further sense of ‘place’, as
a term embracing ‘rank’, ‘status’, and ‘ofﬁce’, provides an even
more important key to its social preoccupations. This application
of the word reveals a great deal about the peculiarly spatialized
terms in which early modern social and political relations were
imagined.
   Fiercely committed to ﬁctions of stability, yet haunted by
exaggerated fears of the anarchy threatened by social-climbing
‘upstarts’, this was a society that (in ofﬁcial ideology at least) still
liked to see itself mirrored in the ﬁxed order of the Ptolemaic
heavens, where every body had its appointed place, and could
move only within its appointed ‘sphere’. Just as disorder in the
macrocosm—when ‘certain stars [meteors or comets] shot madly
from their spheres’ (Dream, 2.1.153)—threatened catastrophe, so
in the social microcosm, the refusal to be conﬁned to one’s proper
place threatened social chaos.1 Thus, for example, in Middleton
and Rowley’s The Changeling (1622), it is the ungoverned ambition
of the discontented servant De Flores—a decayed gentleman, con-
spicuously ‘out of his place’ (1.1.136) and described by his princi-
pal victim as ‘yon meteor’ (5.3.154)—that reduces the world of the
play to ruin. Disobedient servants and disappointed place-getters of

   1
     Even someone as committed to climbing ‘the winding stair’ that leads to ‘great
place’ as Francis Bacon tends to characterize ambition as a kind of violence, and to
idealize proper place as a kind of rest, ‘merit and good works’ being in a double sense
‘the end of motion’, the path to ‘rest’: ‘as in nature things move violently to their
place, and calmly in their place; so virtue in ambition is violent, in authority settled
and calm’ (‘Of Great Place’, in Bacon, Essays, intro. Oliphant Smeaton (1906),
pp. 32–3).

                                         149
                                   Introduction

this sort infest the drama of the period;1 typically, like De Flores,
the gentleman-born whose ‘hard fate has thrust [him] out to servi-
tude’ (Changeling, 2.1.48), or like Bosola, the frustrated ex-scholar
in Webster’s Duchess of Malﬁ, they are men who inhabit the
shadowy borderlands that marked the all-important boundary
between the gentry and the great mass of people without ‘name or
note’ who can claim no place in the annals of society. Full of an
aggrieved sense of social entitlement, they are humiliatingly
dependent on servile employment increasingly governed by the
cash nexus. As a result they can seem strikingly modern ﬁgures,
whose frustrations preﬁgure the gnawing condition of ‘status
anxiety’ that some commentators have diagnosed as the deﬁning
malaise of capitalist society.2
   It was surely Iago, the arch-exemplar of such subversive under-
lings, who did most to establish the type. Though he is a senior ofﬁ-
cer in Othello’s entourage, he is never (unlike Cassio and Roderigo)
clearly identiﬁed as a gentleman; and he speaks of his relation to
his general as though it were no more than a kind of degrading
domestic service (1.1.41–60). Maddened by Cassio’s courtly man-
ners, he must nevertheless play the role of his loyal subordinate,
while (as the carefully distributed pronouns of his opening
exchange with Roderigo remind us3) the necessities of his purse
force him to defer even to his most gullible victim, whose hired
instrument he must pretend to be. Better even than Bosola or De
Flores, Iago articulates the bitter dissatisfactions of service and the
obsession with place to which they can lead. As Barbara Everett
long ago pointed out, at the heart of Shakespeare’s reworking of
Cinthio lies ‘the corruption and inversion of the master–servant
relationship’ that is most shockingly displayed in the temptation
scene (p. 74). But in Iago’s case the rankling sense of injustice pro-
duced by his failure to gain the lieutenancy fuels a deep suspicion

  1
     The sheer familiarity of the ambitious servant ﬁgure allows for a striking
metatheatrical irony in Othello: when Emilia learns of Othello’s extreme jealousy,
her immediate conclusion is that he must have been slandered by ‘Some cogging,
cozening slave, to get some ofﬁce’ (4.2.133). Some actors, especially in the nineteenth
century, have chosen to play this speech as if Emilia already suspected her husband,
but the play offers no evidence for this: it is theatrical convention alone that war-
rants her conjecture.
  2
     See Alain de Botton, Status Anxiety (2004); Vance Packard, The Status Seekers
(1960).
  3 See Commentary, 1.1.2.


                                         150
                                Introduction

about other kinds of displacement, involving both his chauvinist
resentment of outsiders and paranoid fears of sexual usurpation;
and the fact that, with his oddly Spanish name and ambiguous
social status, Iago is himself so uncertainly located in the Venetian
world, only deepens the sense of his insecurity.
   It is not enough that the ensign has been cheated of his ‘place’ by
a desk-soldier, a ‘bookish . . . counter-caster’ (1.1.23–30), but this
‘great arithmetician’ is also an outsider, ‘a Florentine’ (ll. 18–19),
a fellow out of his place; it is not enough that Iago ﬁnds himself
‘beleed’ by his general’s neglect, but this general (as the sarcastic
coined honoriﬁc ‘his Moorship’ stresses1) is even more of a foreign-
er—a ‘wheeling stranger | Of here and everywhere’, as Roderigo
calls him, describing a man so alien to Venetian civility that he has
no proper place at all (1.1.135–6). To make matters worse, the titles
at issue in Iago’s striving for place punningly compound the insult:
to be ‘his Moorship’s ensign’, or standard-bearer, is to be reduced
(in Iago’s own phrase) to a mere ‘ﬂag and sign’ (l. 155), a symbol of
his master’s anomalous presence. A lieutenant, by contrast, is his
superior’s ‘second’ or substitute—one who (as the etymology of
the word indicates) can literally take his place.2 This oddly recur-
sive piece of word-play is important because it initiates a whole
chain of puns and quibbles that not only expose the working of
Iago’s fantasies, but will play a crucial part in arousing Othello’s
own panic of erotic displacement. Puns—those notorious adulter-
ators of meaning that surreptitiously enable illegitimate sugges-
tions to take the place of legitimate meanings—are peculiarly
ﬁtting vehicles for the irrational suspicion that feeds emotions like
jealousy and envy, with their dreams of improper substitution.
From Iago’s point of view it is the very fact that Othello and Cassio
have colluded to displace him in one kind of ofﬁce that makes it
probable that they have cheated him of another:
                                            I hate the Moor,
              And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets
              He’s done my ofﬁce.
                                                 (1.3.376–8)


  1
    So pronounced is the shadow of the conventional honoriﬁc here that it pro-
duced a memorial slip in Q, which prints ‘his Worships’.
  2
    See above, ‘Sources’, p. 32.

                                     151
                                Introduction

                                  I do suspect the lusty Moor
              Hath leapt into my seat. . . .
                I fear Cassio with my nightcap too . . .
                                             (2.1.286–7, 298)1

Tormented as he is by such images of obscene displacement, it will
be Iago’s special pleasure to poison the man he holds responsible
with similar fantasies of usurpation in a world where cuckolded
‘millions . . . nightly lie in those unproper beds, | Which they dare
swear peculiar’ (4.1.63–5).
   Iago’s quibble on ‘ofﬁce’ is enough to make the link between the
two kinds of displacement that so enrage him. Critics who follow
Coleridge in regarding Iago as a diabolic incarnation of ‘motiveless
malignancy’, make a mistake in dismissing the Ensign’s suspicions
of adultery and his resentment at the lost lieutenancy as excuses
designed to conceal the unfathomable nature of his malice. They
overlook the meticulous ingenuity of Iago’s counter-schemes of
adulterous replacement, just as they ignore the self-lacerating
punctilio with which he continues to stress the treacherous word
‘Lieutenant’ even after Cassio is formally stripped of his rank.2 It is,
moreover, the fatal word that, at the triumphant conclusion of the
temptation scene, he will force Othello to pronounce: ‘Now art
thou my lieutenant’ (3.3.478). The juxtaposition of this declara-
tion with Othello’s resolve to ‘furnish . . . some swift means of
death’ for Desdemona, points to the double displacement that Iago
has achieved; for the place properly ascribed to a wife in early mod-
ern discourses of domestic government was precisely that of her
husband’s deputy or second—in effect, his lieutenant.3
   Othello’s conferment of the lieutenancy upon Iago—coming as
it does after the kneeling exchange of ‘sacred vow[s]’ in which the
two men enact a grim parody of wedding ritual (3.3.460–70)—
marks the point at which the ensign not only reclaims the ofﬁce of
which Cassio bilked him, but simultaneously insinuates himself
into the place that belongs to Desdemona. This is the very displace-
ment so weirdly literalized in the ‘monstrous’ oneiric fantasy that

  1
     See Commentary for the word-play involved in ‘seat’ and ‘nightcap’.
  2
     See above, ‘Sources’, p. 32.
  3
     The analogy between military and domestic chains of command is pointed up
by Cassio’s playful description of Desdemona as ‘our great captain’s captain’
(2.1.75) and by Iago’s more cynical claim that ‘our general’s wife is now the
general’ (2.3.301–2).

                                     152
                              Introduction

Iago concocts earlier in the scene, in which he himself takes the
place of Desdemona in Cassio’s adulterous embrace:

           In sleep I heard him say ‘Sweet Desdemona,
           Let us be wary, let us hide our loves’;
           And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
           Cry ‘O, sweet creature!’, and then kiss me hard,
           As if he plucked up kisses by the roots
           That grew upon my lips, then laid his leg
           Over my thigh, and sighed, and kissed, and then
           Cried ‘Cursèd fate that gave thee to the Moor!’
                                                   (3.3.420–27)

Iago’s usurpation of Desdemona’s place is an ingenious variation
on the more commonplace symmetry of revenge, through which,
by himself replacing Othello in Desdemona’s bed, he once planned
to be ‘evened with him, wife for wife’ (2.1.290). But the Ensign’s
vanity cannot in the end be satisﬁed by such a simple calculus of
adulterous exchange: his sense of proportion requires a more elab-
orately ironic scheme, according to which Cassio, the man whom
Othello has allowed to cheat Iago of his military promotion, will
not merely suffer the loss of his own ‘place’ (2.3.291), but be
punished as the imagined usurper of Othello’s matrimonial ofﬁce.
Moreover, the instruments of this preposterous displacement
are to be the very same qualities by which Iago feels himself
slighted, judged, and shunted aside—Cassio’s ‘proper . . . person’
(1.3.382–7), Othello’s ‘free and open nature’ (1.3.388), and the
‘goodness’ of Desdemona’s disposition, ‘so free, so kind, so apt, so
blessed’ (2.3.307–8):

              So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
              And out of her own goodness make the net
              That shall enmesh them all.
                                                (2.3.345–7)

The more effectually Desdemona is persuaded to help ‘put [Cassio]
in [his] place again’ (2.3.306–7), the more Othello will be made
to misconstrue the nature of that ‘place’ and her role as ‘solicitor’
for it (3.3.27). So in the temptation scene Iago’s most innocent-
seeming speeches are peppered with lewd doubles entendres that heat
Othello’s suspicions even as the tempter professes to soothe them
with reassurances of Cassio’s merit and Desdemona’s generosity:
                                   153
                                   Introduction

                Although ’tis ﬁt that Cassio have his place—
                For sure he ﬁlls it up with great ability—
                Yet, if you please to hold him off a while,
                You shall by that perceive him and his means:
                Note if your lady strain his entertainment
                With any strong or vehement importunity;
                Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
                Let me be thought too busy in my fears
                (As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
                And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.
                                                     (3.3.250–9)1

   As Iago progressively colonizes Othello’s mind, the Moor’s gath-
ering sense of displacement is registered in similar passages of
word-play—though in his case the double meanings are beyond
his own control, erupting through the rational surface of his
language, as if mimicking the release of hidden, deeply repressed
knowledge. Thus, when he grasps Desdemona’s hand in 3.4, as if
reaching for reassurance, the ambiguous tenor of his speech, as it
plays on recollections of her ‘free’ and generous nature, matches
the ambiguous signs he reads on her palm itself—an effect magni-
ﬁed for the audience by the uncanny echo of Iago’s insinuating
‘She’s framed as fruitful | As the free elements’ (2.3.326–7):
               This hand is moist, my lady. . . .
               This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart:
               Hot, hot and moist! This hand of yours requires
               A sequester from liberty—fasting and prayer,
               Much castigation, exercise devout—
               For here’s a young and sweating devil here
               That commonly rebels. ’Tis a good hand,
               A frank one. . . .
               A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands,
               But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
                                                     (3.4.34–45)

Somewhere just beneath the surface of this speech, its presence sig-
nalled by the rhetorical stress on ‘hands’ as well as by the heraldry
of hearts, is a maddened recollection of the fatal handkerchief. As

  1
     For ‘hold off’ as a term for sexual resistance, see Troilus and Cressida, 1.2.282;
the bawdy signiﬁcance of the other italicized words is glossed in Gordon Williams,
A Glossary of Shakespeare’s Sexual Language (1997).

                                         154
                                  Introduction

a devious substitute for ‘ocular proof’, the handkerchief itself con-
stitutes a complex visual pun. Imbued with a dye ‘Conserved of
maidens’ hearts’ (3.4.74), it stands in for the bloodstained sheets
whose public display was so important to the symbology of early
modern nuptials; but the strawberries with which it is embroidered
are capable of a remarkably contradictory set of meanings. No
doubt by virtue of its heart-like shape and colour, the strawberry
became a badge of Venus, and could stand for love, but also for sen-
suality and voluptuousness—as it does in Hieronymus Bosch’s
painting The Garden of Earthly Delights; in Christian iconography,
by contrast, the plant’s habit of simultaneous ﬂowering and fruit-
ing had made it an emblem for the chastity and fertility of the Vir-
gin Mary; while in Renaissance emblem books it frequently
appeared with a serpent concealed in its leaves as a ﬁgure for
deceit.1 It is the recollection of this ambiguously decorated hand-
kerchief—charged as it is with an excess of meanings that lie
beyond any rational scrutiny—that seems to set off Othello’s ﬁt in
4.1 and that turns his own heart to stone as he envisages it once
again, clasped in Cassio’s hand, just before the murder (5.2.64–5).
   If the visual pun of the handkerchief can trigger violence in this
way, other kinds of amphibology, like the command delivered to
Othello in 4.1 ‘[d]eputing Cassio in his government’ (l. 229), can
prove equally volatile. Resonating unluckily with Iago’s vicious
equivocations on lieutenancy and the ‘place’ that Cassio ‘ﬁlls’
with such ability, the order precipitates Othello’s sudden violence
against his wife (l. 231), as we can tell from the incoherent fury of
his exit: ‘Cassio shall have my place. . . . Goats and monkeys!’ (ll.
253–5). Again and again the word-play returns to this theme—
most conspicuously perhaps in the notorious conclusion of the
Moor’s farewell to military honour and renown (3.3.349–59). Here
Othello struggles to efface the fantasy of Desdemona’s body sur-
rendered to the ﬁlthy appetites of ‘the general camp’, by invoking
the glamour of ‘plumèd troops . . . the neighing steed and the shrill
trump . . . The royal banner, and all quality, | Pride, pomp, and

  1
    See Geoffrey Whitney, A Choice of Emblemes (1586), no. 24; Lawrence J. Ross,
‘The Meaning of Strawberries in Shakespeare’, Studies in the Renaissance, 7 (1960),
225–40; Lynda E. Boose, ‘Othello’s Handkerchief: “The Recognizance and Pledge of
Love” ’, ELR 5 (1975), 360–74; Edward A. Snow, ‘Sexual Anxiety and the Male
Order of Things in Othello’, ELR 10 (1980), 384–412; Nelson and Haines, ‘Uncon-
summated Marriage’, 8–10.

                                       155
                              Introduction

circumstance of glorious war’—only for the fantasy to erupt again
in an obscene quibble, ‘Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone’. Here
‘occupation’ as ‘profession’ shades into ‘occupation’ as possession
of place (Othello’s command of occupied Cyprus), which in turn
suggests possession of Desdemona’s body. This association is
partly enabled by an ironic echo (ll. 344–5) of the Duke’s consola-
tory platitudes to Brabantio in the council scene. In that exchange
the old man (drawing on the familiar tropes of erotic siege) identi-
ﬁed the contested island with his stolen daughter:

               So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile—
               We lose it not, so long as we can smile . . .
                                             (1.3.209–10)

Just as the storm at the beginning of Act 2 drove the Turks from
their intended occupation of Cyprus, so the Moor (himself destined
to ‘turn Turk’ in the murder that ‘traduce[s]’ the state he served)
now feels himself driven from possession of his marital territory—
the sexual ‘place’ at which he gestures in Act 4:

           But there, where I have garnered up my heart,
           Where either I must live or bear no life,
           The fountain from the which my current runs
           Or else dries up—to be discarded thence,
           Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
           To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
           Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,
           Ay there, look grim as hell.
                                                   (4.2.57–64)

The obsessively indicated ‘there’ of Othello’s speech is both the
marriage bed (that locus of matrimonial ofﬁce) and the beloved’s
breast (that Petrarchan lodging of the surrendered heart); but, as
the imagery gathers force, it becomes something else, the equiva-
lent of King Lear’s ‘forfended place’, the ‘dark and vicious place’ of
begetting (Trag. Lear, 5.1.11, 5.3.163)—the female wellspring of life
itself, imagined as a reptilian mating pond. For Othello at this
moment, and again in the brothel scene, the female genitalia
become, as they do for Lear (Trag. Lear, 4.5.124), a kind of ‘hell’
(l. 93); yet ‘to be discarded thence’, to be expelled, as he still feels
it, from the very source of his own being is to be consigned to a
radical placelessness—a condition that only the monstrous con-
                                   156
                                   Introduction

summation counselled by Iago seems able to assuage: ‘Do it not
with poison; strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath
contaminated’ (4.1.200–1). The place of love will be transmuted
into the place of punishment; and the ironic ‘justice’ of the sugges-
tion ‘pleases’ the Moor because it converts his murder into a species
of abstract ritual—not so much the killing of a woman as the
ceremonial cleansing of a polluted place: ‘Thy bed, lust-stained,
shall with lust’s blood be spotted’ (5.1.37). It is this that accounts
for the curiously impersonal grammar of his soliloquy over the
sleeping Desdemona—‘this sorrow’s heavenly, | It strikes where it
doth love’ (5.2.21–2)—as if Desdemona were merely his ‘place’,
the place Cassio has taken, which must somehow be restored to his
ownership. Yet ironically the effect of the murder is only to betray
the Moor to a state of dispossession and hellish dislocation more
absolute than any he has so far experienced:
                               Where should Othello go? . . .
                                      Whip me, ye devils,
                From the possession of this heavenly sight,
                Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulphur,
                Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid ﬁre . . .
                                                 (5.2.270–9)

   Othello’s last great speech in the play, the apology for his life
with which he ushers in his suicide, constitutes a desperate effort to
relocate himself in both political and erotic terms. In a ﬂeeting
recapitulation of the exotic traveller’s tales with which he once
beguiled Desdemona, Othello returns to the scene of a former tri-
umph in the very heart of enemy territory, the Ottoman city of
Aleppo: symbolically annihilating, in the ‘malignant’ ﬁgure of the
‘turbaned Turk’, the savage inﬁdel that Iago has made of him, this
Moor-turned-Christian-turned-Turk1 reasserts his Venetian iden-
tity with a gesture that allows him to reclaim his place beside Des-
demona on the violated marriage bed:
                I kissed thee ere I killed thee—no way but this:
                Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
                                                     (ll. 357–8)

The chiastic balance of Othello’s rhyming couplet rhetorically per-
fects an ending whose symmetries are designed to replace those of
   1
       On Othello’s enactment of this motif, see Vitkus, Turning Turk, pp. 103–6.

                                        157
                                    Introduction

Iago’s vindictive design. At the same time, the reasserted contrast
between the hero and his antagonist is intensiﬁed by the way in
which the Moor deﬁnes his suicide as a last act of ‘service’ to the
Venetian state; for it is upon their deeply conﬂicting attitudes
towards the institution of service that the opposition between Oth-
ello and Iago largely depends; and ultimately the whole action of
the tragedy can be seen to turn upon it.1

Love, Service, and Identity The theme of service is among Shake-
speare’s more conspicuous additions to the material he found in
Hecatommithi. While, as we shall see, it answered to anxieties that
were widespread in the dramatist’s own society, its appearance in
the play was almost certainly mediated by a passage in Lewis
Lewkenor’s translation of Cardinal Contarini’s The Commonwealth
of Venice (1599): there the dramatist would have read how certain
‘foreign men and strangers’ were ‘adopted into [the] number of citi-
zens, either in regard of their great nobility, or that they had been
dutiful towards the state, or else had done unto them some notable ser-
vice’.2 This passage would have helped to explain the peculiar stand-
ing of Giraldi’s Moorish captain, a foreigner whose prudence,
courage, and martial energy had rendered him ‘very dear to the Sig-
noria’; and in Othello it is the Moor’s nobility and exceptional service
to the state that warrants his oxymoronic claim to be ‘of Venice’,
enabling him to defy the scorn of those who see him as the ‘extrava-
gant and wheeling stranger’ of Roderigo’s sneer (1.1.136).
   Among the Venetians themselves faithful service is imagined as
the very ground of social being: Montano, the governor of Cyprus
who yields his ofﬁce to Othello as a master whom he is proud to
have ‘served’ (2.1.36–7), is deﬁned by his role as the ‘trusty and
most valiant servitor’ of the city (1.3.41). Cassio’s self-image is
similarly inseparable from the ‘place’ secured by ‘love and service’
to his general (3.3.17–18); and his hopes of reinstatement after
his disgrace rest on an appeal to the value of this ‘service past’

   1
     With a witty gesture common in such prolegomenary material, Thomas
Walkley’s prefatory epistle, ‘The Stationer to the Reader’, plays on the importance
of this motif in the play. Likening ‘a book without an epistle’ to ‘a blue coat without a
badge’ (i.e. a token of service to the reader), he takes this ‘piece of work’ upon him-
self as a substitute for the dead author.
   2
     Gasparo Contarini, The Commonwealth of Venice, trans. Lewis Lewkenor (1599),
p. 18.

                                          158
                             Introduction

(3.4.112), as well as (more ambiguously) upon his courtly preten-
sions as Desdemona’s ‘true servant’ (3.3.9). But more than anyone
it is Othello whose place and identity are invested in the ideology of
obedience to those he serves as ‘My very noble and approved good
masters’ (1.3.78). Acknowledged as ‘the noble Moor, whom our full
Senate | Call all in all sufﬁcient’ (4.1.256–7), he not only attracts
the admiration of fellow servants of the state, like Lodovico, Cassio,
and Montano, but compels a grudging praise even from the scorn-
ful Iago (‘Another of his fathom they have none’, 1.1.151). It is
from this that the Moor derives the conﬁdence and sense of high
desert which characterize the two great arias of self that begin
and end his part in the play (1.2.18–28; 5.2.337–55). On his ﬁrst
appearance, Othello’s disdain for Brabantio’s malice rests on a
proud awareness of ‘My services which I have done the Signiory’
(1.2.18); later, as he descends into the chaos of jealousy, he tries to
shore himself against the rage precipitated by the order ‘Deputing
Cassio in his government’ (4.1.229), by reafﬁrming his faithful obe-
dience to the ‘mandate’ of Venice (l. 251); and at the very end,
when his Venetian self seems to have disintegrated into the unbe-
ing of ‘he that was Othello’ (5.2.282), he seeks to restore it with the
reminder that ‘I have done the state some service, and they know’t’,
(l. 338), before tendering a ﬁnal act of service in his suicidal re-
execution of the malignant Turk who ‘Beat a Venetian and tra-
duced the state’ (l. 353).
    If Othello is sustained by his commitment to the ideals of service,
they turn out to be an equally urgent preoccupation for Iago. In his
case, too, they are deeply bound up with questions of identity: but
the contrast between his attitude and Othello’s could hardly be
more extreme. Where his role as servant of the state is what gives
Othello his ﬁrm sense of place, for Iago the servile deference impli-
cit in his sour recognition that ‘We cannot all be masters’ (1.1.43)
amounts to a radical displacement—an affront to the integral self-
hood that he locates in the unfettered ‘power and corrigible
authority’ of his individual will (1.3.321). That indeed is among
the several meanings enfolded in the famously enigmatic conclu-
sion of the speech on service which concludes his resentful tirade
in 1.1, ‘I am not what I am’ (l. 65). Iago is and is not the Moor’s
servant. To be ‘his Moorship’s ensign’ is to be identiﬁed as what, in
his own estimate, Iago essentially is not—a man deﬁned only in
relation to his master; on the other hand, to limit his allegiance to
                                 159
                             Introduction

mere ‘shows of service’ (l. 52)—thereby covertly refusing to be
what society publicly pretends he is—allows the ensign to turn this
shameful obedience to his own advantage, converting (in the quib-
ble he so relishes) the obligation to serve a master into an oppor-
tunity to ‘serve [his own] turn upon him’ (l. 42).
   In this preoccupation with being and seeming, Iago, I have sug-
gested, is partly Hamlet’s heir; and even his vindictive determina-
tion to undo the perceived ‘disproportions’ of his society can seem
to mirror the Prince’s need to set right a world that the usurpation
of his appointed place has rendered radically ‘out of joint’ (Hamlet,
1.5.189). But whereas Hamlet believes himself committed to the
restoration of true hierarchical order, Iago’s consuming indigna-
tion at what he calls ‘the curse of service’ (1.1.34) exposes him
as an envious leveller for whom any kind of subordination is
insufferable:

                                   You shall mark
      Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
      That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
      Wears out his time, much like his master’s ass,
      For naught but provender, and when he’s old—cashiered.
      Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are
      Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,
      Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
      And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
      Do well thrive by them, and when they have lined their coats
      Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
      And such a one do I profess myself—for, sir,
      It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
      Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
      In following him, I follow but myself—
      Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
      But seeming so for my peculiar end.
                                                      (1.1.44–60)

   The key word in this tirade is ‘honest’, an adjective which the
other characters in the play will turn into an approving sobriquet for
the ensign himself—‘honest Iago’—but which in his mouth is
loaded with scorn. Often used to describe female chastity (as it is in
the case of Desdemona, 4.2.12, 17, 38, 65), the word could still carry
its old meaning of ‘honourable’ (as it does when Iago ironically
applies it to the courtly Cassio, 3.3.128–33); but its reference was
                                  160
                                   Introduction

increasingly conﬁned to the plain bourgeois virtues of decency,
truthfulness and sincerity. Moreover, because it was also used to
deﬁne ‘honest’ trades and occupations, including those humbler
forms of domestic service which, though respectable, were seen as
being ‘for a gentleman utterly unmeet’, it typically conveyed as
much social condescension as approval.1 Consequently, from Iago’s
point of view, to submit to its one-sided moral imperatives is to sur-
render to the ideological fraud that governs the entire institution
of service, thereby debasing oneself to the ‘bondage’ of a mere
knave, the lowest form of menial. Modern readers, encountering
this speech in the mouth of a disappointed military ofﬁcer, may be
surprised by its domestic-sounding language of masters and ser-
vants; but this makes complete sense in terms of the ideology and
practice of early modern service.
   This institution, considered in its broadest application, embraced
virtually all conventional forms of social relationship in the world
Shakespeare knew. When the theorist of household government,
William Gouge, wrote in his treatise Of Domesticall Duties (1622)
that ‘servant’ was ‘a general title . . . applied to all such as by any
outward civil bond, or right, owe their service to another’,2 he was
describing a world that still imagined itself in quasi-feudal terms;
in it the social ‘place’ of every individual was substantially deter-
mined by their relation to a more powerful master, forming
an unbroken chain that stretched from the lowliest peasant to the
monarch (who himself owed service to God). Power itself (as a play
like King Lear reminds us) was typically expressed in the ability to
command service; so that Jacobean society, lacking a clear distinc-
tion between the public and private spheres, saw the humblest
forms of domestic labour as existing in an absolute continuum
with service to the state. Moreover, because the functions of both
civil and military service were still managed by networks of indi-
vidual patronage and inﬂuence,3 its bonds and obligations were
habitually understood in the same personal, affective terms that

   1
      See The English Courtier, and the Countrey-gentleman (1586), in Inedited Tracts:
Illustrating the manners, opinions, and occupations of Englishmen during the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries (Roxburghe Library, 1868), p. 25; and cf. Cassio’s address
to the Clown as ‘mine honest friend’ (4.1.18).
   2
      William Gouge, Of Domesticall Duties Eight Treatises (1622), p. 160.
   3
      See Linda Levy Peck, Court Patronage and Corruption in Early Stuart England
(Boston, 1990), pp. 30–74.

                                        161
                                  Introduction

governed the patriarchal household, where (as Peter Laslett has
written) ‘every relationship could be seen as a love-relation-
ship’.1 That Iago’s hopes of promotion were staked as much
on the ‘personal suit’ of ‘three great ones of the city’ as on his
own military prowess is not a sign of graft but a proof of his
standing in the regime of service.
   By the same token, it is the personal nature of servantly obliga-
tion that governs the performance of the ensign’s military duties.
Thus, while both he and Cassio are professional soldiers, their rela-
tionship to their general is of fundamentally the same order as that
of domestic retainers to their lord: when Othello dismisses Cassio
with ‘never more be ofﬁcer of mine’ (2.3.240), his use of the posses-
sive is a reminder of the extent to which a commander’s ofﬁcers
belonged to him in the same way as the higher servants or ‘ofﬁcers’
of a great house belonged to their master. That is why Iago’s
resentments over promotion are cast in the language of mastery
and service; and it is why his dedication of ‘hands [and] heart’ to
Othello’s service in the temptation scene mimics the language of
love (3.3.465–7)—just as it is why the disgraced Cassio dreams only
of reinstating himself as ‘a member of [Othello’s] love’ by perform-
ing ‘the ofﬁce of [his] heart’ (3.4.108–9). The organic nature of
Cassio’s metaphor, which ﬁgures him as a mere limb of Othello’s
household body, a creature who can fully ‘exist’ only as an aspect
of his master’s presence, illustrates how it was almost impossible to
conceive of a properly human existence outside the hierarchy of
masters and servants that made up the early modern ‘society of
orders’. ‘[T]o be no part of any body, is to be nothing’, wrote John
Donne, in a letter lamenting the failure of his ambitions in the
‘service’ to which he had ‘submitted [him]self’.2 In effect a well-
trained and loyal servant became simply a ‘part of his master’,3
obeying him, in the words of one popular manual, ‘not as a water-
spaniel, but as the hand is stirred to obey the mind’.4 Behind such

  1
     Peter Laslett, The World We Have Lost—Further Explored, 3rd edn. (1983), p. 5.
  2
     John Donne, Letters to Severall Persons of Honour (1651), intro. M. Thomas
Hester (New York, 1977), p. 51.
   3
     Steffano Guazzo, La civile conversatione (1574), cited in Dennis Romano, House-
craft and Statecraft: Domestic Service in Renaissance Venice 1400–1600 (Baltimore,
1996), p. 20.
   4
     John Dod and Robert Cleaver, A Godly Forme of Household Government (1630),
sig. Aa3.

                                       162
                            Introduction

thinking it is possible to glimpse the symbolic meaning of the ser-
vant’s ‘livery’, a word that originally comprehended not just the
coat and heraldic badge in which a master dressed his servants,
but the food he supplied to them: the liveried man was not merely
clothed in his master’s identity, but absorbed into his social body,
to be fed as his own body was fed.
   In Iago’s case, however, the naturalized rhetoric of hand
and heart disguises a brutally material understanding of the
master–servant relationship—in which livery is reduced to the
supply of animal ‘provender’ and the wearing of ‘coats’ whose
sole function is to conceal their ‘lining’ of pecuniary self-interest.
Professing to be one of those who know how to ‘[d]o themselves
homage’, Iago identiﬁes himself as a kind of ‘masterless man’, part
of that reprobate community of social exiles who haunted the
early modern imagination—creatures whose very being constitut-
ed something of a paradox, since service was presented as a condi-
tion so universal that to be a man at all was necessarily to be
somebody else’s ‘man’. In this respect, however, the ensign’s resis-
tance to the obligations of service is by no means unusual, given
his membership in a whole gallery of disaffected and rebellious ser-
vants, whose prominence in the drama of the period bears elo-
quent testimony to the increasing stresses affecting the ideology of
universal service—stresses that can also be documented from
numerous contemporary sources, including the very manuals
of domestic government that set out to reinforce the ideology.
Thus William Gouge repeatedly inveighs against servants who,
forgetting ‘their present place and condition’ and ‘wilfully pre-
sum[ing] above it’, think ‘their master’s house a prison to them,
muttering and murmuring against their strait keeping in, as they
deem it’ (pp. 599, 611).
   If, for such malcontents, the obligations of their calling consti-
tuted a form of ‘obsequious bondage’, a humiliating infringement
of individual dignity and a denial of the longing to be ‘one’s own
man’, that was because servants (especially those below a certain
rung in the hierarchy) were understood to have voluntarily surren-
dered any claim to authority over their own lives: ‘while the term
of their service lasteth’, wrote Gouge, ‘. . . they are not their
own. . . . both their persons and their actions are their master’s’
(p. 604). So literally was this the case that to many such hirelings
their lot must often have felt little different from slavery. In the
                                 163
                                 Introduction

Latin word servus the conditions of ‘servant’ and ‘slave’ had indeed
been indistinguishable; but the ofﬁcial doctrine of Shakespeare’s
time, insisting as it did upon the sublime virtue of willing obedi-
ence, stressed the absolute distinction between ‘servile’ and
‘liberal’ servants—between bondslaves and those whose service
was undertaken ‘by voluntary contract’ (p. 160). Since actual slav-
ery had no signiﬁcant place in English experience at this time
(except for those, like Othello, taken in war), the force of this dis-
tinction was largely rhetorical: the importance of slavery lay in the
idea of an utterly abject bondage which served to deﬁne all that the
free servant was not, thereby sustaining the ideal of service as a
system of voluntary engagement maintained by profoundly natu-
ralized ‘bonds’ of mutual duty and affection. This is the distinction
on which Iago insists in deﬁning the limits of his bounden duty to
Othello (3.3.138–40); and it helps to explain why ‘slave’—the epi-
thet repeatedly hurled at Iago in the last act of the play—was
among the most potent terms of abuse in the extensive early mod-
ern lexicon of status-based insult.
   Underpinning the idealization of free service was a theological
insistence on the Christian subject’s duty to God as the pattern of
all servant–master relationships. Supported by a number of para-
bles in which God’s relationship with humanity was analogized to
that of a master with his servants, this doctrine required a quasi-
religious ‘duty of reverence’ towards masters: not only had Christ
himself, by freely ‘[taking] upon him the form of a servant’, offered
the perfect model of willing service, he was also the pattern of all
masters.1 Thus servants were doubly ‘bound to obedience’ since
(as Gouge put it)
masters, by virtue of their ofﬁce and place, bear Christ’s image and stand
in his stead . . . it followeth that servants in performing duty to their mas-
ter perform duty to Christ, and in rebelling against their master, they rebel
against Christ. (p. 641)

Non serviam (‘I will not serve’) was notoriously the watchword of
Lucifer and his rebellious cohorts; for if the faithful servant’s ofﬁce
was to be understood as an expression of Christian duty and humil-
ity, Lucifer’s sin of pride was imagined precisely as a refusal of ser-


                         1
                             Gouge, pp. 603, 618, 641.

                                      164
                                   Introduction

vice: ‘in heav’n they scorned to serve, so now in hell they reign’,
wrote Phineas Fletcher of the rebel angels (Purple Island, 6.10),
anticipating the famous deﬁance of Milton’s Satan: ‘Better to reign
in hell, than serve in heaven’ (Paradise Lost, 1.263).1
   Thus, if the Venetians seek to contain the threat posed by Iago’s
subversive determination to ‘follow but [him]self’ by rhetorically
consigning him to the outcast condition of ‘slave’ (5.2.242, 275,
290, 331), the extremity of that threat is registered in Othello’s
identiﬁcation of him as a ‘devil’ (5.2.285, 299). From an orthodox
perspective, Iago’s repudiation of service is recognizably part of
the profane ‘Divinity of hell’ (2.3.335) preached by a ‘demi-devil’
whose ‘I am not what I am’ constitutes a blasphemous unspeaking
of the biblical name of God (‘I am that I am’, Exodus 3: 14). The
diabolical nature of the ensign’s disobedience is predictably com-
pounded by his delight in the ‘heavenly shows’ that make up his
‘ﬂag and sign of love’ to his master (2.3.337; 1.1.155). It was just
such ‘forms and visages of duty’ that the handbooks of domestic
government taught their readers to expect in practitioners of what
Gouge (following Ephesians 6: 6) called ‘eye-service’ (p. 165). Com-
paring them to Judas, the archetype of those who betray their mas-
ters, Gouge describes these servile dissemblers, in words that echo
Iago’s refusal to wear his ‘heart upon [his] sleeve’ (1.1.64), as hav-
ing ‘a heart, and a heart, making show of one heart outwardly,
and have another, even a clean contrary heart within them’.2 So
‘possessed with a devil’ are these inhuman creatures that ‘they will
seek all the revenge they can, if they be corrected, [and] secretly
endeavour to take away the life of their masters’ (p. 614).
   This, then, is the social and moral framework within which the
play’s conﬂicting attitudes to service are judged. But, if that were
all, it would be difﬁcult to explain the seductive power that Iago,
though he may lack the charismatic grandeur of Milton’s Satan,
has exercised over the imagination of audiences and readers alike.
The dangerous energy of drama always depends on its ability to
animate attitudes that its own ofﬁcial voice deplores; and Iago’s
dissidence has the capacity to engage the sympathy of anyone who

  1
     Compare faithful Abdiel’s wish only to ‘serve | In heaven God ever blest, and his
divine | Behests obey’ (vi. 183–5).
  2
     Gouge, p. 617; the Judas comparison is also made in ‘I.M.’, A Health to the
Gentlemanly Profession of Servingmen (1598), p. 148.

                                        165
                                  Introduction

has felt the arrogance of authority. It can do so because of the skill
with which his rhetoric exploits antipathies and resentments
which ran deep in early modern society. The ideal universal service
was confronted by challenges from radical thinkers on one side and
from disillusioned conservatives on the other. Iago, with a charac-
teristic disdain for consistency, draws on both kinds of critique. His
repudiation of ‘obsequious bondage’ and insistence upon the free-
dom and integrity of the individual will echoes the deﬁance of the
turbulent radicals denounced by Gouge—those who cited St Paul’s
‘be not ye the servants of men’ (1 Corinthians 7: 23) to argue that
it was ‘against nature for one to be a servant, especially a bond-
servant to another, [since] it is the prerogative of Christians to be
all one; [and] subjection of servants to masters is against that
prerogative, [because it] is against the liberty that Christ hath
purchased for us . . . wherewith he hath made us free’ (pp. 591–4).
At the same time, Iago’s nostalgic appeal to ‘the old gradation’ and
his denunciation of the habitual ingratitude of masters, recalls the
complaints of conservative social critics, who saw the institution of
service as corrupted by the new commercial dispensation of wage-
labour; and his scorn for the servant who ‘Wears out his time,
much like his master’s ass, | For naught but provender’, only to be
‘cashiered’ in his old age, mirrors the invective of men like Richard
Brathwait who deplored ‘the unthankfulness or disrespect of mas-
ters towards their servants, when they have spent their strength
and wasted them in their service’. 1
   The menace of such ingratitude lay in its capacity to expose the
empty pretence of mutual affection and reciprocal obligation that
underpinned the ideals of service; and the emotional force of
Iago’s complaint depends partly on the brutally material relation-
ship that his subdued pun in ‘cashiered’ helps to discover beneath
the chivalric rhetoric of military ‘ofﬁce’—one in which the degrad-
ing possibility of cashierment is understood as a permanent condi-
tion of ‘soldiership’.2 Othello himself, though the play tactfully
suppresses the fact, is a species of mercenary; and Iago makes clear

  1
     Richard Brathwait, The English Gentleman (1630), pp. 158–9.
  2
     It is symptomatic of the absence of real distinction between military and other
forms of service that the verb cashier (a newly coined term-of-art imported by sol-
diers returning from the Low Countries in 1585) was almost immediately extended
to the domestic realm—so in Histrio-mastix (1599) the young lords are described as
having ‘cashiered their trains’ of servants (3.370).

                                       166
                                 Introduction

to Roderigo that the prime consideration governing all human rela-
tions is cold cash (‘Put money in thy purse’, 1.3.333–71). In the
Venetian world where, he claims, ‘the old gradation’ founded upon
natural ties of ‘love’ and ‘duty’ has been displaced by engines of
improper inﬂuence (‘letter and affection’), service is best treated as
a commercial contract—a system of pecuniary reward governed
by legally enforceable ‘just term[s]’ (1.1.35–9). To imagine other-
wise is to submit to an ‘obsequious bondage’ that mockingly dis-
guises itself in the language of natural ‘bonds’ and ofﬁces of the
heart. Thus Iago presents his ‘forms and visages of duty’ (l. 50) as
demonstrations of the necessary hypocrisy to which any honest
serving-man will be driven if he is to resist the ideological cheat
through which his profession is controlled.
   The extent to which Iago’s discontent could capitalize on a more
general shift in social attitudes is nicely indicated by the changed
meaning of ‘obsequious’—a word that (deriving from the Latin for
‘follow’) could still mean merely ‘dutiful’, but had very recently
taken on the contemptuous sense of ‘sycophantic’ which it has for
the ensign. Even Gouge, whose idea of true service involved a kind
of self-surrender, subsuming one’s individual identity in the larger
social ‘countenance’ of one’s master, cautioned against the exces-
sive servility that he dubbed ‘obsequious’ (pp. 593–4). But Iago
allows for no such nice distinctions: his determination to ‘follow
but myself’ is a conscious renunciation of the whole doctrine of
service, and one that looks forward to the Leveller Richard Over-
ton’s claims for the ‘self-propriety’ of the individual. In his loathing
of servitude Iago voices the same bitterness as historical malcon-
tents like the musician and tutor Thomas Whythorne, who, deter-
mined to be ‘[his] own man’ and insisting that a tutor’s role was ‘to
be free and not bound, much less to be made slave-like’, declared
that ‘to be a serving-creature or servingman . . . was so like the life
of a water-spaniel, that must be at commandment to fetch or bring
here, or carry there, with all kind of drudgery, that I could not like
of that life’.1
   The power of Iago’s rhetoric to compel a reluctant assent from
the audience depends upon its eloquent mimicry of such ressenti-
ment; and once we are alert to the social context of his grievance,

  1
     James M. Osborn (ed.), The Autobiography of Thomas Whythorne (1962), pp. 10,
28, 46.

                                      167
                                   Introduction

the smallest details of his relationship with Othello—like the
moment when the General, with a patronizing ‘good Iago’, orders
his subordinate to ‘disembark [his] coffers’ from the ship
(2.1.202–3)—can appear charged with murderous feeling: for
what else but the humiliating labour of ‘his master’s ass’, or the
menial ‘fetching’ of a water spaniel is the ensign being asked to per-
form? Indeed ‘fetch’, with its edge of contempt, is the very verb that
Iago uses to describe his task (‘I must fetch his necessaries’,
2.1.275).1 In this context, the language of the temptation scene,
with its elaborate parade of the loyalty, ‘duty’, and ‘love’ that ser-
vants were supposed to owe their masters, will acquire a dangerous
new edge—as, for example, when Iago responds to Othello’s
demand to know his thoughts:
                                    Good my lord, pardon me:
                 Though I am bound to every act of duty,
                 I am not bound to that all slaves are free to . . .
                                                     (3.3.137–9)

Equally loaded are the terms of his response to Othello’s insistence
upon proof:
                                        now I shall have reason
               To show the love and duty that I bear you
               With franker spirit. Therefore—as I am bound—
               Receive it from me.
                                                    (3.3.196–9)

The rhetoric of this speech is calculated to persuade Othello of the
maddening contrast between the frankness (freedom and honesty)
of Iago’s servantly ‘love and duty’ and the deviousness of Desde-
mona’s supposed betrayal of wifely ﬁdelity.2 But, for the audience,
the heavy metrical stress on ‘bound’ will act as a reminder of social
bonds of a more degrading kind, underlining the covert sarcasm in
Iago’s recollection of the ‘obsequious bondage’ that he despises.

  1
     Shakespeare himself makes the satiric link between domestic service and the
fetching of water-spaniels in Two Gentlemen of Verona, 3.1.268–72.
   2
     It is part of Iago’s strategy to promote himself from the subordinate role of ser-
vant to the equality of ‘friend’ (3.3.380). Plutarch’s widely quoted and imitated
essay in the Moralia, ‘How to Tell a Flatterer from a Friend’, explores the problem of
false friendship to which the great are especially vulnerable. Cf. Robert C. Evans,
‘Flattery in Shakespeare’s Othello: The Relevance of Plutarch and Sir Thomas Elyot’,
Comparative Drama, 35 (2001), 1–41.

                                         168
                             Introduction

With its elaborate profession of servile self-surrender, it prepares
the way for the climax of the scene and Iago’s yielding of hands
and heart to Othello’s service: ‘Let him command, | And to obey
shall be in me remorse, | What bloody business ever’ (3.3.467–9).
   If Iago’s language identiﬁes their kneeling exchange of vows as a
blasphemous troth-plighting, a parody of the wedding rite whose
knot he has patiently untied, he means Othello to accept it as a for-
mal reafﬁrmation of his ‘ofﬁce’—an act of absolute self-surrender
to the master’s will (‘I am your own for ever’, 3.3.479), and an
exhibition of the ‘duty’, ‘service’, and ‘homage’ that we have seen
him privately reserving for himself (1.1.49–54). With proper mag-
nanimity, Othello duly welcomes this enactment of the reciprocal
bonds between master and servant: ‘I greet thy love, | Not with
vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous’ (3.3.469–70). But
the bitter irony of Iago’s Judas-like ritual of submission is that his
eye-service has precisely reversed its ostensible meaning; for it is
actually Othello who (like Marlowe’s Faustus when he binds
Mephostophilis to be ‘his servant’) has indentured his soul to his
own subordinate—as his unwitting confession earlier in the scene
suggests: ‘I am bound to thee for ever’ (l. 216). Try then, as both the
Venetians and Othello may, to reafﬁrm the proprieties of ‘service’
and ‘place’ (5.2.338, 368), it is difﬁcult to avoid the levelling impli-
cations of a plot that shows the master ‘Fallen’, as Lodovico puts it,
‘in the practice of a damnèd slave’ (5.2.290), rhetorically bound to
his subordinate by their shared abjection. Not only that, but as we
shall now see, the play’s whole take on duty and submission is com-
plicated by its treatment of the female characters for whom obedi-
ence proves to be a profoundly equivocal virtue.

The Place of Women If the main action of Othello is bracketed
by the protagonist’s two great demonstrations of obedience to
Venice—his departure to confront ‘the general enemy Ottoman’
(1.3.50) and his killing of the ‘malignant . . . Turk’—it is likewise
framed by two conspicuous acts of female disobedience—
Desdemona’s deﬁance of her father’s will, and Emilia’s refusal of
her husband’s commands. The place of women in the economy of
service was in some respects an anomalous one: while the manuals
of household government typically imagined the social order in
terms of a male hierarchy of masters and servants, there was of
course a parallel female hierarchy. In a strictly patriarchal society,
                                  169
                             Introduction

however, the ranking of women was complicated by their general
duty of obedience to men—a duty not only enjoined on them in
scripture, ofﬁcial homilies, and domestic treatises, but (in the case
of husbands) sanctiﬁed by the order of matrimony itself. Of course
wives might sometimes command, but only as substitutes or
lieutenants, taking the place of their husbands for highly speciﬁc
purposes; otherwise their role was a subordinate one. When
Desdemona demands of Emilia ‘Who is thy lord?’ (4.2.101), the
waiting-woman’s reply, ‘He that is yours, sweet lady’, draws atten-
tion to a close symmetry between the roles of wife and servant—
one that is also emphasized by the way in which Desdemona is
made to vie with Iago in the claim to ‘honesty’ (3.3.229, 386, 434;
4.2.12, 17, 38, 65) much as he competes with her in protestations
of ‘love’ to the Moor.
   The subordination of women, as the ambiguous reference of
Emilia’s ‘lord’ indicates, was a complex affair that involved poten-
tially conﬂicting obligations to masters, fathers, and husbands;
and this exposure to the contradictions of what Desdemona calls
‘divided duty’ (1.3.180) in turn had the capacity to reveal uncom-
fortable splits in the notionally seamless structure of authority. It is
not surprising therefore that the two tragedies in which Shake-
speare most conspicuously tests the limits of obedience, Othello and
King Lear, should both accord particular structural prominence to
episodes in which women ﬁnd themselves compelled to resist patri-
archal authority.
   When Desdemona is summoned before the Senate to account for
her elopement, Brabantio, like Lear after him, is confounded by his
daughter’s behaviour. Unable to reconcile his daughter’s revolt
with his notion of her as a female paragon, incapable of either self-
will or appetite—‘A maiden never bold, | Of spirit so still and quiet
that her motion | Blushed at herself’ (1.3.95–7)—Brabantio
can only ascribe her behaviour to ‘witchcraft’ on the part of her
seducer (1.3.65); but the whole tenor of Desdemona’s defence
makes it clear that she has acted as a free agent, asserting the right
to fulﬁlment of her own desire. Her courageous frankness antici-
pates Cordelia’s sturdy resistance to Lear’s emotional absolutism.
When her father demands to know ‘[w]here most you owe obedi-
ence’ (l. 179), Desdemona acknowledges the familial bonds of ‘life
and education’ that deﬁne her place as daughter, only to insist that
her primary obligation is now deﬁned by her chosen place as wife:
                                  170
                             Introduction

               And so much duty as my mother showed
               To you, preferring you before her father,
               So much I challenge that I may profess
               Due to the Moor my lord.
                                              (ll. 185–8)


Desdemona’s emphasis on feminine submission in ‘duty’, ‘bound’,
and ‘due’ is balanced by the strikingly masculine independence of
‘challenge’, just as her wish to accompany Othello to war is justi-
ﬁed not in terms of wifely duty, but of sexual entitlement and a dis-
dain for feminine ‘quiet’ (‘if I be left behind | A moth of peace . . .
The rites for why I love him are bereft me’, ll. 253–5).
    After the bold self-determination of this beginning, modern
readers and audiences are liable to be disconcerted (as Bradley was)
by Desdemona’s apparently helpless passivity in the face of her
husband’s jealous rage. The saint-like quietism with which she
embraces death can appear especially shocking: commending
herself to Othello with her last breath as ‘my kind lord’ (5.2.125),
she answers Emilia’s question about who has killed her with a
rhetorical cancellation of her own identity: ‘Nobody—I myself’
(l. 124). It is a mistake, however, to read this as evidence of weak-
ness. Desdemona, as the best actors of the part have always
known, is strong in the way that Cordelia is strong; but for both
women independence is ultimately constrained by certain socially
prescribed limits: for them, as for the rebellious ‘servant-monster’
Caliban, whose vaunted ‘freedom’ consists only of the claim to
choose ‘a new master’ (Tempest, 2.2.183–6), liberty is conceivable
only as the willing transfer of allegiance to a new ‘lord’. If Braban-
tio was once his daughter’s ‘lord of duty’, the name of ‘husband’
usurps that lordship (1.3.183–4).
   Shakespeare is hardly oblivious to the irony of this situation;
but the play also demands respect for a resolve which matches
Othello’s faithful submission to the demands of the state, and
which the play’s language invests with an almost religious value. If
Othello’s self-image is deﬁned by his ofﬁce as servant of the state,
Desdemona’s is invested in her place as ‘true and loyal wife’
(4.2.34). Each is committed to a kind of service that is imagined (in
imitation of a familiar Christian paradox) as perfect freedom. Just
as the Christian subject’s love for God expresses itself in the lan-
guage of unconditional obedience, so Desdemona constantly
                                  171
                            Introduction

speaks of her love as a form of glad subordination: ‘My heart’s sub-
dued | Even to the very quality of my lord’ (1.3.248–9); ‘Be as your
fancies teach you: | Whate’er you be, I am obedient’ (3.3.89–90).
Being freely chosen, Desdemona’s allegiance to her husband is as
different from her subjection to paternal tyranny as Othello’s ‘free
condition’ (1.2.26) is from the bondage into which he was once
sold; and if his deliverance from slavery constituted one form of
‘redemption’ (1.3.138), the love that Desdemona ‘consecrates’ to
her husband’s honour is another (1.3.252). In Othello’s mind it is
only Desdemona who stands between him and the ‘Chaos’ or
‘perdition’ that he associates with his former state (3.3.91–3). Thus
it is not simply Cassio’s habit of courtly hyperbole that licenses the
lieutenant to dress her in the poetry of Marian adoration:

                                                O, behold,
             The riches of the ship is come on shore!
             You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
             Hail to thee, lady; and the grace of heaven,
             Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
             Enwheel thee round!
                                                (2.1.82–7)

There is something saint-like about Desdemona’s endurance under
the lash of Othello’s jealousy; and it is the resolute maintenance of
her submission in the face of private abuse and public humiliation,
even after her husband has struck her in public, that prompts
Lodovico’s wonder: ‘Truly, an obedient lady’ (4.1.239). Whilst
such apparent passivity may not be to the liking of modern audi-
ences, from the play’s perspective, Desdemona’s patient ﬁdelity in
the face of Othello’s jealous madness is not a betrayal of her earlier
spirit, but a conﬁrmation of it.
   Yet Shakespeare remains fully awake to the fact that it is just the
qualities associated with Desdemona’s generous spirit that render
her vulnerable to Iago’s insinuations. The ‘free . . . disposition’
which licenses the ‘violence’ of her love to Othello (2.3.307–8;
1.3.247) is what Iago can punningly interpret as the promiscuous
‘country disposition’ supposedly characteristic of Venetian women
(3.3.204); and, under his tutelage, Othello will learn to read his
wife’s steadfast compliance as a proof of her erotic pliancy:
‘And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient, | Very obedient’

                                 172
                                   Introduction

(4.1.247–8)—obedient, he means, to any man’s will.1 Brabantio’s
embittered warning (‘She has deceived her father, and may thee’,
1.3.291), which Iago is so careful to repeat (‘She did deceive her
father, marrying you’, 3.3.209), spells out the patriarchal logic of
this conclusion—a logic that Othello will prove unable to resist: for
a woman to betray one man, it insists, is to reveal her lascivious
propensity to ‘betray more men’ (5.2.6).
   The material sign of the tragic contradictions that destroy Desde-
mona is the very theatrical property whose discovery ushers in the
ﬁnal scene—the bed, which is at once the symbol of Desdemona’s
matrimonial bond and her designated ‘death-bed’ (5.2.53). In early
modern culture the marriage bed was much more than a necessary
piece of furniture: almost oppressively over-determined in its public
and private meanings, it was the site of crucially signiﬁcant rituals
governing both the beginning and the end of life, just as it was the
locus for the most important of all domestic duties, nuptial consum-
mation and perpetuation of the lineage—the matrimonial ‘ofﬁce’
(1.3.377) over whose usurpation Iago broods. The almost totemic
signiﬁcance accorded to the marriage bed is perhaps best suggested
by those ornate tester tombs, canopied beds of gilded marble, on
which the ﬁgures of Elizabethan magnates and their wives lie pil-
lowed for eternity, proclaiming the triumph of wedded love over
death. Mesmerized by his own fantasy, in which murder becomes a
priestly sacriﬁce sanctiﬁed by heavenly sorrow (5.2.21, 67), Othello
envisions the sleeping Desdemona, with her white skin ‘smooth as
monumental alabaster’ (l. 5), as just such a serene piece of funeral
sculpture. But the ﬁnal spectacle of three corpses lying side by side
on the same bed, revisits that resemblance in the form of atrocious
parody, capitalizing on the morbid fantasies that invade Desde-
mona’s imagination after the brothel scene, and on the intimate
association of sexuality and death so characteristic of the period’s
erotic imagination.
   Denounced by her husband as ‘that cunning whore of Venice |
That married with Othello’ (4.2.90–1), Desdemona has attempted
a symbolic reafﬁrmation of their marriage bond by calling on
Emilia to ‘Lay on my bed my wedding sheets’ (l. 105). The social

  1
    For the word-play on the second syllable of ‘obedient’ that helps to license this
misreading, see Commentary, 4.1.247–8.


                                        173
                                    Introduction

symbolism of wedding sheets was as powerful as that with which
the marriage bed itself was invested: marked with the blood that
announced the death of a virgin and her rebirth as a wife, and cus-
tomarily displayed to prove the consummation of a marriage, they
became the fetishized tokens of the physical and emotional trans-
formation that rendered husband and wife ‘one ﬂesh’. In Othello
their signiﬁcance is further complicated by an iconic link with the
purloined handkerchief, itself imbrued with a dye ‘Conserved of
maidens’ hearts’, whose fatal witness her sheets are meant to con-
tradict. But their meaning, as Desdemona’s uncanny premonition
in the next scene reminds us, proves to be dangerously unstable:
‘If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me | In one of these
same sheets’ (4.3.22–3). Her sentimental desire appeals to a well-
documented contemporary fashion amongst aristocratic women
whose wills required that they be wound for burial in their own
wedding sheets. In this way their funeral obsequies might be trans-
formed into a ceremonious re-enactment of nuptials, perpetuating
the marital bond beyond the gates of the grave.1 In Desdemona’s
case, however, it is as though the conversion of sheet to shroud
traps her into unconscious collusion with Iago, who has already
nominated her bed as a place of death, where the blood of murder
will cancel out the blood of adulterous desire: ‘Do it not with poi-
son; strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated’
(4.1.200–1).2 In this way the most intimate token of Desdemona’s
ﬁdelity to her ‘ofﬁce’ becomes the sign of her impending murder in
a grotesque literalization of the sex–death metaphor so character-
istic of Renaissance erotics.
   Sharply contrasted with Desdemona is the play’s other wife,
Emilia, who follows an almost opposite trajectory through the play.
In her relationship with Iago, Emilia exhibits for most of the time a
cowed compliance that makes her so much an accessory to his plot-
ting that she not only steals the handkerchief for him, but (in spite

   1
     The will of Lady Frances Stuart, for example, included the instruction to ‘wind
me up again in those sheets . . . wherein my Lord and I ﬁrst slept that night we were
married’, cited in Clare Gittings, Death, Burial and the Individual in Early Modern Eng-
land (1984), p. 193; see also pp. 111–12.
   2
     The deeply symbolic choice of the violated marriage bed as the site of revenge,
where Othello imagines chopping Desdemona ‘into messes’ (l. 176) was perhaps
inﬂuenced by Arden of Faversham, where the jealous Arden vows that his wife’s lover
‘Shall on the bed which he thinks to deﬁle | See his dissevered joints and sinews
torn’ (1.40–1).

                                         174
                              Introduction

of her deep sympathy for Desdemona) conceals her knowledge of it
until too late. However, just as Desdemona’s domestic obedience
matches Othello’s ﬁdelity to public duty, so Emilia’s slavish defer-
ence to her husband’s will conceals a bridling rebelliousness that
parallels his own secret resentment of service. Shakespeare orches-
trates the contrast with Desdemona to brilliant theatrical effect in
the women’s last scene alone together, where the plangent roman-
ticism of Desdemona’s Willow Song is set against the indignant
common sense of Emilia’s tirade against the selﬁsh tyranny of
husbands:

         But I do think it is their husbands’ faults
         If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
         And pour our treasures into foreign laps,
         Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
         Throwing restraint upon us; or say they strike us,
         Or scant our former having in despite—
         Why, we have galls; and though we have some grace,
         Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know,
         Their wives have sense like them; they see, and smell,
         And have their palates both for sweet and sour
         As husbands have. What is it that they do,
         When they change us for others? Is it sport?
         I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
         I think it doth. Is’t frailty that thus errs?
         It is so too. And have not we affections,
         Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
         Then let them use us well: else let them know,
         The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
                                                       (4.3.81–98)

   It is sometimes thought that the heat with which Emilia defends
the idea of female adultery as payback may help to explain Iago’s
jealous suspicion of his wife; but the real signiﬁcance of Emilia’s
proto-feminism lies in its appropriation of the idea of revenge as
an instrument of social redress. For revenge, of course, is Iago’s
strong suit; and Emilia’s denunciation of husbandly oppression is
in many ways the equivalent of Iago’s denunciation of the iniquity
of masters and the humiliations of service. Driven by the same
desire to be ‘evened’, it exploits the same claim to equality that
is implicit in Iago’s vindictive accountancy against Othello and
Cassio; and it is just this explosion of outrage against the ‘despite’
                                   175
                                  Introduction

governing the male order of things that prepares for Emilia’s open
revolt in the ﬁnal scene, when she three times publicly deﬁes her
husband:
             iago
               What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.
             emilia
               Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
               ’Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
               Perchance, Iago, I will ne’er go home. . . .
             iago ’Swounds, hold your peace.
             emilia ’Twill out, ’twill out! I peace?
               No, I will speak as liberal as the north;
               Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
               All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.
             iago
               Be wise, and get you home.
             emilia
               I will not.
                                              (5.2.192–5, 217–23)

   If Emilia’s refusal of obedience forms a kind of structural rhyme
with Desdemona’s deﬁance of Brabantio at the beginning of the
play, her shift from ‘not now’ to the absolute deﬁance of ‘never’
makes it much the more radical gesture of the two; and in her
domestic rebellion Richard Strier has discovered the starting point
for Shakespeare’s celebration of ‘virtuous disobedience’ in King
Lear.1 As she herself implies, Emilia’s insubordination reneges
against the misogynistic prescriptions of orthodox social doctrine:
her repeated refusal to return home to her ‘proper’ domestic
sphere, like her ﬁerce insistence on speaking her mind—in spite of
the silence enjoined on women by ‘heaven and men’—renders her
in Iago’s eyes a ‘villainous whore’, a shamefully indisciplined pub-
lic woman. In the same way, of course, Desdemona’s supposed
adultery degraded her from the ‘still and quiet’ maiden of Braban-
tio’s description to the ‘public commoner’ denounced by Othello in
the brothel scene (4.2.73). By virtue of her disgracefully public
character, a whore is in some ways the female equivalent of a mas-
terless man, an errant creature ‘of here and everywhere’, owing
  1
    Richard Strier, ‘Faithful Servants: Shakespeare’s Praise of Disobedience’, in
Heather Dubrow and Richard Strier (eds.), The Historical Renaissance: New Essays on
Tudor and Stuart Literature and Culture (Chicago, 1988), 104–33 (p. 111).

                                       176
                            Introduction

obedience to no one; and both Emilia and Desdemona are seen by
their husbands as women out of their place, creatures whose rebel-
lious extravagance consigns them to what this society (in spite
of its ofﬁcial pretences) actually imagines as the default position
for women—that of whore. In Venice, Iago warned Othello (trad-
ing on the city’s reputation as the capital of European prostitu-
tion) ‘wife’ is simply another guise for a courtesan: ‘their best
conscience | Is not to leave’t undone, but keep’t unknown’
(3.3.206–7).
   The predictable answer to this scandalous collapsing of oppo-
sites might have been to use the play’s third woman, Bianca, as a
straightforward foil to set off the virtues of Desdemona. Bianca is,
after all, dismissed as a ‘strumpet’ not only by Iago, but by a self-
righteous Emilia, and even by her own lover, Cassio. Yet, if the
absurd misidentiﬁcation orchestrated by Iago in 4.1 stresses the dif-
ference between the two, the ‘whiteness’ denoted by Bianca’s name
associates her with the ‘fair’ Desdemona in a way that is not simply
ironical. The evident genuineness of her love for Cassio makes his
sneer at her as a mere ‘customer’ seem cheap and cold-hearted
(4.1.116); and, in her indignant reaction to the slurs cast on her
transgressive independence by Iago and Emilia, she is allowed to
speak for all the abused women of the play—Desdemona above all:
‘I am no strumpet, | But of life as honest, as you that thus | Abuse
me’ (5.1.120–2). The marvellously adroit stressing of ‘honest’
(which here connotes candour and integrity rather than sexual
purity) exposes that slippery adjective to one last test: for not only
does Bianca’s use of the word offer the play’s ﬁrst open challenge to
the much vaunted ‘honesty’ of Iago, it also calls in question the
value of the purely technical chastity by which the male world sets
such frantic store. In that sense it chimes with Emilia’s deﬁant
proclamation of the rights of wives and allows Bianca to claim a
kind of kinship with the two more conventionally honest women of
the play, Desdemona and Emilia—the martyred wives who them-
selves become rhetorically indistinguishable in Othello’s question
‘why should Honour outlive Honesty?’ (5.2.244).

Conclusion Like the improvised motto with which the Earl of
Kent endeavours to ﬁx the meaning of Lear’s opening scene
(‘To plainness honour’s bound, | When majesty falls to folly’,
1.1.148–9), the Moor’s rhetorical question is an attempt to reduce
                                 177
                            Introduction

the meaning of the play to the comfortable certainties of moral
allegory: Honour cannot outlive Honesty, he means us to think,
because properly understood they are one thing—rather as (hon-
ourable) man and (honest) wife are one ﬂesh. ‘Honourable’ is,
after all, one of the meanings of ‘honest’. But the ambiguities and
ambivalences that Shakespeare progressively exposes in the latter
term serve to remind us of the play’s resistance to schematization
of any kind. This introduction has traversed a range of historical
concerns that were, I believe, of crucial signiﬁcance in shaping the
course of Othello’s action. Awareness of these matters can help us
to understand the particularity of the murderous social tensions
that animate the tragedy: they include the early modern politics of
gender, the ideology of rank and service, ideas of place and dis-
placement, fantasies of monstrosity and discovery, and (perhaps
most signiﬁcantly for modern readers of the play) the emergent
discourse of ‘race’. But the play will not submit to the thematic
tyranny of any one of these, any more than it would yield to those
old-fashioned analyses that sought to neutralize its social engage-
ment by presenting it as a ‘universal’ tragedy of jealousy, or as a
drama of superﬁcial civilization overcome by innate barbarity.
That, no doubt, is why scholars interested in what Othello may
have to reveal about the evolution of racial thought have found it
so difﬁcult to arrive at any consensus about the play’s own attitude
towards the hero’s colour—leaving a critic as scrupulous as Vir-
ginia Vaughan trapped in irreducible contradiction: ‘I think this
play is racist; and I think it is not’ (p. 70).
   In the end it may be vain to expect a conclusive resolution of
such moral issues. Although Renaissance dramatists consistently
defended themselves against the enemies of the stage by maintain-
ing the impeccably didactic virtues of their work, their real con-
cern lay in exploiting the theatrical potential of social conﬂict,
rather than in seeking ways to reform human imperfection. Shake-
speare was no exception; and even if his penetrating social and
psychological intelligence made him an exceptionally acute ob-
server of historical process, his intentions were scarcely of a
documentary character either. To confront a play like Othello in
performance is to be reminded that the turbulent social currents by
which its characters—white and black, male and female, master
and servant, hero and villain—are swept along, mattered to
Shakespeare above all as sources of dramatic and poetic energy:
                                178
                           Introduction

they are what enabled him to transform Giraldi’s squalid bourgeois
narrative of adultery and murder into a tragedy of exceptional
power, ensuring that the superﬁcial absurdities of plot, which so
preoccupied Rymer and Shaw, would be overwhelmed in the
theatre by the great brass music that erupts from Othello’s passion
and despair.




                               179
This page intentionally left blank
                      EDITORIAL PROCEDURES


For reasons explained in Appendix B, the text of this edition is
based on that of the 1623 First Folio, using the version prepared by
Charlton Hinman for the Norton Facsimile,1 which I have collated
with the copy held in the Public Library in Auckland, New Zealand.
The F text has been carefully compared with those of the First
Quarto of 1622 and the Second Quarto of 1630, using the facsimi-
le prepared by Charlton Hinman for Q1 and the electronic version
of the Huntington Library copy for Q2.2 In some cases I have incor-
porated words and short passages from Q that do not appear in F—
this applies particularly to the oaths and profanities that seem to
have been purged from the F text; all are recorded in the collation.
The text has been thoroughly modernized in accordance with the
principles adumbrated by the General Editor.3 Modernization is
generally silent, except where it may be contentious or where sig-
niﬁcant word-play is involved—as with Iago’s rank of ensign
(‘ancient’ in both Q and F); in such cases the alteration is collated
and (if necessary) discussed in the commentary. F and Q are alike
in the inconsistency of their abbreviations: each often fails to indi-
cate elision when the metre clearly requires it, and each equally
often marks it when the effect is metrically disruptive. Accordingly
such variants are treated in this edition as no different from other
accidents of spelling and punctuation.
   Act and scene divisions are those of the Folio, which have been
followed by all subsequent editions. However, it needs to be remem-
bered that such divisions (which do not appear in the 1622 Quarto)

   1
     Charlton Hinman (ed.), The First Folio of Shakespeare: The Norton Facsimile (New
York, 1968). This is not a reproduction of a single copy of the Folio, but a composite
of pages from thirty copies owned by the Folger Shakespeare Library.
   2
     Charlton Hinman, Othello 1622, Shakespeare Quarto Facsimiles (Oxford,
1975); The Tragœdy of Othello (1630), Early English Books Online (Ann Arbor, Mich.,
1999).
   3
     See Stanley Wells, ‘Modernizing Shakespeare’s Spelling’, in Wells and Gary
Taylor, Modernizing Shakespeare’s Spelling, with Three Studies in the Text of Henry V
(Oxford, 1979); and Wells, Re-Editing Shakespeare for the Modern Reader (Oxford,
1984). Editorial procedures for the entire series are laid out in Gary Taylor’s edition
of Henry V (Oxford, 1982), pp. 75–81.

                                         181
                         Editorial Procedures

are editorial rather than authorial, and bear little relation to the
continuous staging practised in the theatre for which Shakespeare
originally wrote the play: there even act divisions remained for the
most part a classical fossil, until the so-called ‘private’ theatres
(where candles had to be regularly trimmed and replaced) institut-
ed the custom of playing music between the acts; and scene divi-
sions were a literary, rather than theatrical convention, which
did not necessarily involve any changes of scenic effect. Indeed,
Shakespeare and his contemporaries made use of a largely bare
stage, where (with the exception of a limited number of stage pro-
perties, like the bed in Othello, 5.2) location was for the most part
left to the audience’s imagination. Accordingly in this edition both
act and scene divisions are rendered as inconspicuous as possible,
and matters of location (where they are of any relevance) are
addressed only in the commentary.
   All signiﬁcant alterations to F’s stage directions are collated, and
any that may be debatable are distinguished in the text by the use of
half-brackets and usually discussed in the commentary. Directions
for characters to speak ‘aside’ or to address another character are
entirely editorial and therefore not normally collated. Where nec-
essary the end of an aside will be indicated by a dash. Speech pre-
ﬁxes are silently normalized and given in full.
   The collation employs the format described in Taylor’s Henry V:
303–4 Why . . . gentleman?] f (‘Why thou silly Gentleman?’); Why, thou
silly Gentleman. q1; Why thou silly Gentleman. q2; Why, thou silly
gentleman! rowe

The lemma, representing the chosen reading, is followed by the
source of the reading, then by the rejected Folio and/or Quarto
reading(s), and ﬁnally by the proposals of other editors, if any. The
latter are recorded only when they seem particularly plausible or
interesting. Early editions are cited literatim, ignoring only ‘long s’
and ligatures. In addition to collating emendations, contentious
modernizations, and signiﬁcant changes in punctuation, this edi-
tion also records realignments of verse and prose; since these have
a bearing on sometimes controversial issues of versiﬁcation, they
are best studied as a group and are therefore consigned to a sepa-
rate appendix.
   The commentary employs OED’s abbreviations for different
parts of speech and its numbering system for deﬁnitions and
                                 182
                         Editorial Procedures

usages, which are often paraphrased without acknowledgement.
Proverbs and proverbial expressions have been checked against
both Tilley and Dent. References to other works of Shakespeare are
keyed to the Oxford edition of The Complete Works, ed. Stanley Wells
and Gary Taylor (Oxford, 1986). This edition was prepared inde-
pendently of that in the Oxford Complete Works; but I have of
course consulted that edition and made use of it at several points.
Biblical citations are to the Geneva Bible (1560).
   Because Shakespeare’s use of his major source, Giraldi Cinthio’s
Gli Hecatommithi, is so extensive, it has seemed useful to print a full
text of the original novella, rather than clog up the commentary
with long quotations. The commentary does, however, alert the
reader to the more signiﬁcant borrowings, and Giraldi’s text is
annotated with act, scene, and line numbers to make cross-
referencing as efﬁcient as possible. Further appendices are devoted
to the dating of the play, to its complicated and much-debated
textual history, and to its important use of music.
   Place of publication, unless otherwise speciﬁed, is London.
Uncorrected and stop-press corrected states of early texts are indi-
cated by (uncorr.) and (corr.).


Abbreviations and References
                      editions of shakespeare
F, F1             The First Folio (1623)
F2                The Second Folio (1632)
Q, Q1             The First Quarto (1622)
Q2                The Second Quarto (1630)
Alexander         Peter Alexander, Complete Works (1951)
Andrews           John F. Andrews, Othello, Everyman (1995)
Bevington         David Bevington, Complete Works (New York, 1997)
Cambridge         W. G. Clark, J. Glover, and W. A. Wright, Works, The
                  Cambridge Shakespeare, 9 vols. (1863–6)
Cambridge 1891    W. G. Clark, J. Glover, and W. A. Wright (revised W.
                  A. Wright) Works, The Cambridge Shakespeare, 9 vols.
                  (1891–3)
Capell            Edward Capell, Comedies, Histories, Tragedies, and
                  Poems, 10 vols. (1767–8)
Collier           John Payne Collier, Works, 8 vols. (1842–4)
                                 183
                         Editorial Procedures

Delius         Nicolaus Delius, Werke, 7 vols. (Elberfeld, 1854–60)
Dyce           Alexander Dyce, Works, 6 vols. (1857)
Dyce 1864      Alexander Dyce, Works, 2nd edn., 9 vols. (1864–7)
Dyce 1875      Alexander Dyce, Works, 3rd edn., 10 vols. (1875–6)
Furness        Horace Howard Furness, Othello, New Variorum
               (Philadelphia, 1907)
Hanmer         Thomas Hanmer, Works, 6 vols. (Oxford, 1743–4)
Hart           H. C. Hart, Othello, Arden, 1st ser. (1928)
Hinman, F      Charlton Hinman, The First Folio of Shakespeare: The
               Norton Facsimile (New York, 1968)
Hinman, Q      Charlton Hinman, Othello 1622, Shakespeare Quarto
               Facsimiles (Oxford, 1975)
Honigmann      E. A. J. Honigmann, Othello, Arden, 3rd ser. (1997)
Jennens        Charles Jennens, Othello, the Moor of Venice (1773)
Johnson        Samuel Johnson, Plays, 8 vols. (1765)
Keightley      Thomas Keightley, Plays, 6 vols. (1864)
Knight         Charles Knight, Comedies, Histories, Tragedies, and
               Poems, Pictorial Edition, 7 vols. (1838–43)
McMillin, Q    Scott McMillin, The First Quarto of Othello (Cambridge,
               2001)
Malone         Edmond Malone, Plays and Poems, 10 vols. (1790)
Mowat–Werstine Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine, Othello, New
               Folger (New York, 1993)
Muir           Kenneth Muir, Othello, New Penguin (Harmonds-
               worth, 1968)
Murphy         Andrew Murphy, The Tragedie of Othello, The More of
               Venice, Shakespearean Originals; First Editions (1995)
Oxford         Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor (general editors), Com-
               plete Works (Oxford, 1986)
Pope           Alexander Pope, Works, 6 vols. (1725)
Ridley         M. R. Ridley, Othello, Arden, 2nd ser. (1962)
Riverside      G. Blakemore Evans (textual editor), The Riverside
               Shakespeare (Boston, Mass., 1974)
Rowe           Nicholas Rowe, Works, 6 vols. (1709)
Sanders        Norman Sanders, Othello (Cambridge, 1984; rev. edn.
               2003)
Steevens       Samuel Johnson and George Steevens, Plays, 10 vols.
               (1773)
                                 184
                       Editorial Procedures

Steevens 1785   Samuel Johnson and George Steevens, Plays, 10 vols.
                (1785)
Steevens–Reed   George Steevens and Isaac Reed, Plays, 15 vols. (1793)
Theobald        Lewis Theobald Works, 7 vols. (1733)
Theobald 1740   Lewis Theobald Works, 8 vols. (1740)
Walker          Alice Walker and John Dover Wilson, Othello (Cam-
                bridge, 1957)
Warburton       William Warburton, Works, 8 vols. (1747)
White           Richard Grant White, Works, 12 vols. (Boston, Mass.,
                1857–66)


                other works and abbreviations
Adelman         Janet Adelman, ‘Iago’s Alter Ego: Race as Projection in
                Othello’, SQ 48 (1997), 125–44
Berger          Thomas L. Berger, ‘The Second Quarto of Othello and
                the Question of Textual “Authority” ’, in Virginia
                Vaughan and Kent Cartwright (eds.), Othello: New Per-
                spectives (Madison, Wis., 1991), 26–47
Bible           The Geneva Bible: A Facsimile of the 1560 Edition, intro.
                Lloyd E. Berry (Madison, Wis., 1969)
Bodin           Jean Bodin, Method for the Easy Comprehension of
                History (1565), trans. Beatrice Reynolds (New York,
                1966)
Bowers          Fredson Bowers, Bibliography and Textual Criticism
                (Oxford, 1964)
Bradley         A. C. Bradley, Shakespearean Tragedy (1904; repr. 1961)
Bradshaw        Graham Bradshaw, Misrepresentations: Shakespeare
                and the Materialists (Ithaca, NY, 1993)
Bristol         Michael Bristol, 'Charivari and the Comedy of Abjec-
                tion in Othello’, Renaissance Drama, ns 21 (1990), 3–21;
                repr. in Linda Woodbridge and Edward Berry (eds.),
                True Rites and Maimed Rites: Ritual and Anti-Ritual in
                Shakespeare and His Age (Urbana, Ill., 1992), 75–97
Bullough        Geoffrey Bullough, Narrative and Dramatic Sources of
                Shakespeare, 8 vols. (1957–75), vol. vii
Burton          Robert Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, ed. Floyd
                Dell and Paul Jordan-Smith (New York, 1927)
                                185
                      Editorial Procedures

Calderwood     James L. Calderwood, The Properties of Othello
               (Amherst, Mass., 1989)
Cavell         Stanley Cavell, Disowning Knowledge in Six Plays of
               Shakespeare (Cambridge, 1987)
Chambers       E. K. Chambers, William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts
               and Problems, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1930)
Coghill        Nevill Coghill, Shakespeare’s Professional Skills (Cam-
               bridge, 1964)
Coleridge      S. T. Coleridge, Coleridge’s Shakespeare Criticism, ed.
               T. M. Raysor, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Mass., 1930)
Collier MS     Manuscript emendations in J. P. Collier’s copy of F2
               (the ‘Perkins Folio’), generally assumed to be in Col-
               lier’s hand
Davies         Edward Davies, The Art of War and Englands Traynings
               (1620)
Dent           R. W. Dent, Shakespeare’s Proverbial Language: An Index
               (Berkeley, Calif., 1981)
Dobson         E. J. Dobson, English Pronunciation 1500–1700, 2nd
               edn., 2 vols. (Oxford, 1968)
ELR            English Literary Renaissance
Everett        Barbara Everett, ‘ “Spanish” Othello: The Making of
               Shakespeare’s Moor’, in Catherine Alexander and
               Stanley Wells (eds.), Shakespeare and Race (Cambridge,
               2000), 64–81 (repr. from SS 35 (1982), 101–12)
Faustus        Christopher Marlowe, Dr Faustus and Other Plays, ed.
               David Bevington and Eric Rasmussen (Oxford, 1995)
Florio         John Florio, Queen Anna’s New World of Words (1611)
Floyd-Wilson   Mary Floyd-Wilson, English Ethnicity and Race in Early
               Modern Drama (Cambridge, 2003)
Giraldi        Giovanbattista [Giambattista, Giovanni Battista]
               Giraldi Cinthio, Gli Hecatommithi (1565). Appendix C
               reprints Third Decade, Story 7; other extracts are
               reprinted in Bullough.
Greg           W. W. Greg, The Shakespeare First Folio (Oxford, 1955)
Gurr           Andrew Gurr, ‘Maximal and Minimal Texts: Shake-
               speare v. the Globe’, SS 52 (1999), 68–87

                              186
                          Editorial Procedures

Hankey             Julie Hankey, Othello, Plays in Performance (Bristol,
                   1987)
Hinman, Printing Charlton Hinman, The Printing and Proof-Reading
                 of the First Folio of Shakespeare, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1963)
Honigmann,         E. A. J. Honigmann, ‘Shakespeare’s Revised Plays:
‘Revised Plays’    King Lear and Othello’, The Library, 6th ser., 4 (1982),
                   142–73
Honigmann,         E. A. J. Honigmann, The Texts of ‘Othello’ and
Texts              Shakespearian Revision (1996)
Hunter             G. K. Hunter, ‘Othello and Colour Prejudice’, Proceed-
                   ings of the British Academy, 53 (1967), 139–63
Jackson, ‘Copy’    MacD. P. Jackson, ‘Printer’s Copy for the First Folio
                   Text of Othello: the Evidence of Misreadings’, The
                   Library, 6th ser., 9 (1987), 262–7
Jackson,           MacD. P. Jackson, review of Honigmann, The
‘Texts review’     Texts of ‘Othello’ and Shakespearian Revision, Shakespeare
                   Studies, 26 (1998), 364–72
JEMCS              Journal for Early Modern Cultural Studies
Jones              John Jones, Shakespeare at Work (Oxford, 1995)
Jonson             Ben Jonson, Works, ed. C. H. Herford and P. and E.
                   Simpson, 11 vols. (Oxford, 1925–52)
Jorgenson          Paul A. Jorgenson, Shakespeare’s Military World (Berke-
                   ley, Calif., 1956)
Kaul               Mythili Kaul (ed.), Othello: New Essays by Black Writers
                   (Washington, DC, 1997)
Kellner            Leon Kellner, Restoring Shakespeare (1925)
Knolles            Richard Knolles, Generall Historie of the Turkes (1603);
                   repr. in Bullough
Kökeritz           Helge Kökeritz, Shakespeare’s Pronunciation (New
                   Haven and London, 1953)
Kolin              Philip C. Kolin (ed.), Othello: New Critical Essays (New
                   York, 2002)
Leavis             F. R. Leavis, ‘Diabolic Intellect and the Noble Hero’, in
                   The Common Pursuit (1952; repr. Harmondsworth,
                   1969), 136–59 (repr. from Scrutiny, 6 (1937), 259–83)
                                   187
                          Editorial Procedures

Lewkenor           Lewis Lewkenor, The Commonwealth and Government of
                   Venice (1599); translation of Gasparo Contarini, De
                   Magistratibus et Republica Venetorum (1543)
McMillin,          Scott McMillin, ‘The Othello Quarto and the “Foul-
‘Hypothesis’       Paper” Hypothesis’, SQ 51 (2000), 67–85
McMillin,          Scott McMillin, ‘The Mystery of the Early Othello
‘Mystery’          Texts’, in Kolin, 401–24
Marks              Elise Marks, ‘ “Othello/me”: Racial Drag and the Plea-
                   sures of Boundary-Crossing with Othello’, Comparative
                   Drama, 35 (2001), 101–23
Muir, Sources      Kenneth Muir, The Sources of Shakespeare’s Plays
                   (1977)
Neill,             Michael Neill, ‘ “Mulattos,” “Blacks,” and “Indian
‘ “Mulattos” ’     Moors”: Othello and Early Modern Constructions of
                   Human Difference’, in Putting History to the Question:
                   Power, Politics and Society in English Renaissance Drama
                   (New York, 2000); repr. from SQ 49 (1998), 361–74
Neill, ‘Opening’   Michael Neill, ‘Opening the Moor: Death and Discov-
                   ery in Othello’, in Issues of Death: Mortality and Identity
                   in English Renaissance Tragedy (Oxford, 1997), 141–67
Neill, ‘Places’    Michael Neill, ‘Changing Places in Othello’, in Putting
                   History to the Question, 207–36 (repr. from SS 37
                   (1984), 115–31)
Neill,             Michael Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds”: Race, Adultery
‘ “Unproper        and the Hideous in Othello’, in Putting History to the
Beds” ’            Question, 237–68 (repr. from SQ 40 (1989), 383–412)
N&Q                Notes and Queries
OED                Oxford   English  Dictionary,          online     version
                   <http://www.oed.com/>
Onions             C. T. Onions, A Shakespeare Glossary (Oxford, 1911; rev.
                   edn., Oxford, 1977)
Parker, ‘Dilation’ Patricia Parker, ‘Shakespeare and Rhetoric:
                   “Dilation” and “Delation” ’, in Patricia Parker and
                   Geoffrey Hartman (eds.), Shakespeare and the Question
                   of Theory (New York and London, 1985), 54–174
Parker, Margins    Patricia Parker, Shakespeare from the Margins: Lan-
                   guage, Culture, Context (Chicago, 1996)

                                   188
                      Editorial Procedures

Partridge      Eric Partridge, Shakespeare’s Bawdy (1947)
Paster         Gail Kern Paster, Humoring the Body: Affects, Material-
               ism and the Early Modern Stage (Chicago, 2004)
Pechter        Edward Pechter, Othello and Interpretive Traditions
               (Iowa City, 1999)
Pliny          Philemon Holland, The Historie Of The World. Com-
               monly called, The Naturall Historie Of C. Plinius Secun-
               dus (1601); translation of Gaius Plinius Secundus,
               Naturalis Historia
Potter         Lois Potter, Othello, Shakespeare in Performance
               (Manchester, 2002)
RES            Review of English Studies
Rizvi          Pervez Rizvi, ‘Evidence of Revision in Othello’, N&Q ns
               45 (1998), 338–43
Rosenberg      Marvin Rosenberg, The Masks of Othello (Berkeley,
               Calif., 1961; repr. Newark, Del., n.d.)
Rubinstein     Frankie Rubinstein, A Dictionary of Shakespeare’s Sexu-
               al Puns and their Signiﬁcance (1984)
Rymer          Thomas Rymer, A Short View of Tragedy (1693)
Schäfer        Jürgen Schäfer, Documentation in the O.E.D.: Shake-
               speare and Nashe as Test Cases (Oxford, 1980)
Siemon         James R. Siemon, ‘ “Nay, that’s not next”: Othello, V.ii
               in Performance, 1760–1900’, SQ 37 (1986), 38–51
Sisson         C. J. Sisson, New Readings in Shakespeare, 2 vols. (Cam-
               bridge, 1956)
Snow           Edward A. Snow, ‘Sexual Anxiety and the Male Order
               of Things in Othello’, ELR 10 (1980), 384–412
SQ             Shakespeare Quarterly
SS             Shakespeare Survey
Stratioticos   Leonard and Thomas Digges, An arithemetical warlike
               treatise named Stratioticos (1579; 2nd edn. 1590)
subs.          substantively
Taylor         Gary Taylor, ‘The Folio Copy for Hamlet, King Lear, and
               Othello’, SQ 34 (1983), 44–61
Taylor and     Gary Taylor and John Jowett, Shakespeare Reshaped,
Jowett         1606–23 (Oxford, 1993)
                               189
                          Editorial Procedures

TC                 Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor with John Jowett and
                   William Montgomery, William Shakespeare: A Textual
                   Companion (Oxford, 1987)
Tilley             Maurice Palmer Tilley, A Dictionary of Proverbs in Eng-
                   land in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Ann
                   Arbor, Mich., 1950)
TLS                Times Literary Supplement
Tynan              Kenneth Tynan (ed.), ‘Othello’: The National Theatre
                   Production (London, 1966; New York, 1967)
Upton              John Upton, Critical Observations on Shakespeare (1746)
Vaughan            Virginia Mason Vaughan, Othello: a contextual history
                   (Cambridge, 1994)
Vitkus,            Daniel J. Vitkus, ‘ “Turning Turk” in Othello: The
‘ “Turning         Conversion and Damnation of the Moor’, SQ 48
Turk” ’            (1997), 145–76
Vitkus, Turning    Daniel Vitkus, Turning Turk: English Theater and the
Turk               Multicultural Mediterranean, 1570–1630 (Basingstoke,
                   2003)
Walker, ‘Texts’    Alice Walker, ‘The 1622 Quarto and the First Folio
                   Texts of Othello’, SS 5 (1952), 16–24
Walker, Problems   Alice Walker, Textual Problems of the First Folio (Cam-
                   bridge, 1953)
Walton             J. K. Walton, The Quarto Copy for the First Folio of Shake-
                   speare (Dublin, 1971)
Warner             Richard Warner, A letter to David Garrick . . . concern-
                   ing a glossary to the plays of Shakespeare (1768)
Wells              Stanley Wells, Re-Editing Shakespeare for the Modern
                   Reader (Oxford, 1984)
Wells, All Time    Stanley Wells, Shakespeare: For All Time (2002)
Whitney            Lois Whitney, ‘Did Shakespeare know Leo Africanus?’,
                   PMLA 37 (1922), 470–88
Williams,          Gordon Williams, A Dictionary of Sexual Language and
Dictionary         Imagery in Shakespearean and Stuart Literature, 3 vols.
                   (1994)
Williams,          Gordon Williams, A Glossary of Shakespeare’s Sexual
Glossary           Language (1997)
Wright             George T. Wright, Shakespeare’s Metrical Art (Berkeley,
                   Calif., 1988)

                                   190
Othello, the Moor of Venice
This page intentionally left blank
                    THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY


othello, ‘the Moor’, general of the Venetian forces
brabantio, ‘father to Desdemona’, a Venetian Senator
Michael cassio, ‘an honourable lieutenant’, Othello’s second-in-
command
iago, ‘a Villain’, Othello’s ensign
roderigo, ‘a gulled gentleman’, suitor to Desdemona
duke of Venice
montano, ‘Governor of Cyprus’
lodovico
gratiano, brother to Brabantio              }    ‘two noble Venetians’
clown
desdemona, ‘wife to Othello’, and daughter of Brabantio
emilia, ‘wife to Iago’, and waiting-woman to Desdemona
bianca, ‘a courtesan’, mistress of Cassio
senators
sailor
messenger
herald
ofﬁcers
gentlemen ‘of Cyprus’
musicians
Attendants and servants
THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY] after f (following the text: ‘The Names of the Actors’); not in q
roderigo] q (throughout); Rodorigo f (throughout) emilia] q (‘Emillia’ throughout); Æmilia f
(throughout)

THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY The order of                 cate an authorial origin for the list, since
  characters broadly follows the list of ‘The        his ofﬁce cannot easily be deduced from
  Names of the Actors’ printed at the end of         the text itself (see below).
  F, from which the descriptions in quota-        OTHELLO In Giraldi Cinthio the central char-
  tion marks also derive. This is one of             acter is identiﬁed simply as ‘a Moor’ (un
  seven such lists printed at the end of plays       Moro). The exact origin of his name in
  in F. All seem to have been included to ﬁll        the play is obscure. The name ‘Otello’,
  up large areas of blank page, suggesting           although rare, did exist in Italian; and
  that they were added in the printing               Shakespeare may have been inﬂuenced in
  house, although Honigmann (Texts, pp.              his choice by ‘Thorello’, the name of the
  70–2; Arden edn., p. 333) has linked ﬁve           jealous husband in the ﬁrst version of
  of them to the editorial practice of the           Every Man In His Humour (printed 1601)
  scribe Ralph Crane (see App. B, pp. 421–3,         in which Shakespeare had performed a
  431). However, the identiﬁcation of Mon-           few years earlier: see Robert S. Miola’s
  tano as ‘Governor of Cyprus’ may indi-             introduction to his edition of Jonson’s

                                             193
    comedy (Manchester, 2000), p. 65. How-           ensign See App. F(i).
    ever, the resemblance of ‘Othello’ to ‘Oth-      MONTANO, ‘Governor of Cyprus’ Like the Q
    man’—the founder of the Ottoman (or                  stage direction at 2.1.0.1 (‘Enter Mon-
    ‘Othoman’) Turkish empire—is unlikely                tanio, Governor of Cypres’), from which it
    to be accidental and it lends additional             may derive, this description presumably
    irony to Othello’s ﬁnal self-identiﬁcation           reﬂects either some unfulﬁlled authorial
    with the ‘malignant and . . . turbaned               intention or a detail of early staging and
    Turk’ (5.2.351) whose killing is re-                 costuming, since in the text itself Mon-
    enacted in his own suicide. Some critics             tano is never described as Governor, but
    observe a curious chime between the                  simply as the ‘trusty and most valiant
    ‘hell’ contained in Othello and the                  servitor’ of Venice (1.3.40–1); nor is he
    ‘demon’ in Desdemona.                                treated with any special deference by the
general A relatively novel military term. See            arriving Venetians in 2.1.
    App. F(i).                                       GRATIANO,     brother to Brabantio See
Cassio The name Michael Cassio appears to                5.2.200.
    be Shakespeare’s invention, though it            DESDEMONA The name derives from Giraldi,
    may have been suggested by that of Lucas             where the murdered heroine’s father is
    Michael, a commander sent into Crete by              blamed for having given her ‘a name of
    the Venetians in Knolles’s Generall Histo-           unlucky augury’, Disdemona being a ver-
    rie of the Turkes (1603), a probable source          sion of the Greek dusdaimon = unfortu-
    for the play. In view of Cassio’s disgrace           nate. It is possible that Shakespeare also
    in Act 2, it must involve a play on the verb         heard a punning reference to the demonic
    ‘cass’ = cashier (OED v. 2). Shakespeare             in the name of Othello’s ‘fair devil’.
    may also have known the Italian adjective        BIANCA ‘white’. Another name chosen for its
    casso, glossed by Florio (Queen Anna’s               ironic suggestiveness—one that com-
    New World of Words, p. 87) as ‘deprived,             plicates the contrast between her and
    frustrated, crossed, cashiered’. See also            the chaste heroine whose husband
    1.1.48.                                              denounces her in the same language
lieutenant See App. F(i) for a note on this              (‘whore’, ‘strumpet’) that Iago and Emilia
    military term.                                       direct against Bianca. She is an amalgam
IAGO, RODERIGO Shakespeare’s choice of Span-             of two anonymous characters in Giraldi,
    ish names for two Venetians full of chau-            a serving-woman who copies the embroi-
    vinist resentment against ‘strangers’                dery on Disdemona’s purloined handker-
    (whether they be Florentines or Moors)               chief, and the courtesan with whom the
    is surely a deliberate irony. Jacobean               capo di squadra ‘used to amuse himself’.
    audiences, aware of the Venetian practice            However, while Bianca is described as
    of employing mercenary ofﬁcers, might                ‘courtesan’ in F’s list, there is little in the
    easily have identiﬁed Iago as a Spaniard,            play to conﬁrm this description: although
    particularly because his name was likely to          her anomalous position as a young
    have recalled that of Spain’s patron saint,          woman living alone and willing to enter-
    known (ﬁttingly enough for this play) as             tain a man to ‘supper’ will clearly have
    Sant’Iago Matamoros(St James,Hammer of               seemed suspicious, her love for Cassio
    the Moors): see Everett, pp. 67–8. More-             appears entirely genuine. The Venetian
    over, Iago is identiﬁed as ‘a false Spaniard’        institution of courtesans was well known
    in the ballad Tragedie of Othello the Moore          from the reports of travellers like Thomas
    (Furness, pp. 398–402), usually supposed             Coryat: as distinct from common prosti-
    to be a forgery by J. P. Collier. Signiﬁcantly       tutes, courtesans were often cultured
    Giraldi appears to identify Iago’s proto-            women of relatively high status, who fre-
    type, the alﬁeri, as a foreigner when, at            quently hired themselves for extended
    the end of the tale, he has him ‘return . . .        periods to a single lover.
    to his own country’.




                                                 194
       The Tragedy of Othello, the Moor of Venice



1.1      Enter Roderigo and Iago
roderigo
   Tush, never tell me! I take it much unkindly
   That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
   As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
iago
   ’Sblood, but you’ll not hear me! If ever I


1.1] f (Actus Primus. Scœna Prima.); not in q 0.1 Roderigo and Iago] f; Iago and Roderigo q 1
Tush] q; not in f 2 thou . . . hast] f; you . . . has q1; thou who hast q2 4 ’Sblood] q1; not
in f, q2 you’ll] f, q2; you will q1



1.1.0–1 Enter . . . Iago F typically prefers to      the more respectful plural form (see
    arrange the characters in order of con-          Anthony and Cleopatra, ed. M. Neill
    ventional precedence, while Q (which has         (Oxford, 1994), App. C, ‘A Note on Pro-
    Iago enter ﬁrst here) may sometimes              noun Usage’).
    register the dramatic suggestiveness of        3 this Roderigo presumably rebukes Iago
    having the ensign precede his natural            for having been party to Othello’s
    superiors (see e.g. 1.3.48, 4.1.0). How-         courtship of Desdemona even while he
    ever, in this case the ensuing dialogue          was supposedly hired to act in Roderigo’s
    suggests that Roderigo is walking im-            interest; but Shakespeare plays on the
    patiently away, while Iago, following            audience’s curiosity by leaving the event
    behind, begs him to listen.                      unspeciﬁed.
 1 Tush Mild expletive expressing impa-           4–7 ’Sblood . . . city The lineation here is
    tience; seemingly cut here as part of F’s        problematic. Neither Q nor F (whose
    often over-cautious suppression of oaths         expurgation of Iago’s oath may have
    and profanities (see App. B, pp. 420–1,          forced some realignment) seems satisfac-
    430–1). Cf. also ‘Sblood (l. 4). McMillin,       tory; but no obvious solution presents
    noting their extra-metricality, suggests         itself. With the notable exception of
    that both expletives were actors’ interpo-       Honigmann, who follows F, most editions
    lations (Q, p. 30). However, such excla-         have accepted Steevens’s solution, par-
    mations are often extra-metrical, and in         tially regularizing Q by transferring
    any case elision will readily smooth out         ‘abhor me’ to a line by itself. However,
    the irregularity of this line (‘take’t’).        this renders both 4 and 6 as incomplete
 2 thou Since th could be written in a form          lines; and although a pause at the end of
    that closely resembled y, Q’s ‘you’ is           l. 4, after Iago’s outburst of irritation and
    almost certainly based on a misreading;          before the more conciliatory ‘If ever I
    the Q2 editor, spotting the error, restored      did dream . . . ’, might be dramatically
    not simply the grammar of the original,          appropriate, it is harder to justify a second
    but the aggressive condescension of the          lengthy pause after ‘Abhor me’. The pre-
    singular pronoun. Iago soothingly adopts         sent arrangement, whilst regularizing

                                              195
1.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Did dream of such a matter, abhor me.                                                            5
roderigo
  Thou told’st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.
iago
  Despise me if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
  In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
  Off-capped to him; and, by the faith of man,
  I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.                                                  10
  But he—as loving his own pride and purposes—
  Evades them with a bombast circumstance,
  Horribly stuffed with epithets of war;
  And in conclusion
  Non-suits my mediators. For ‘Certes,’ says he,                                                  15
  ‘I have already chose my ofﬁcer.’
  And what was he?


9 Off-capped] f; Oft capt q    14 And in conclusion] q1; not in f, q2     16 chose] f, q2; chosen
q1


   ll. 4–6, preserves Q’s overcrowded l. 7;             amount of money or other consideration
   this might, however, be smoothed over in             by which a man’s support . . . may be
   performance by rapid delivery.                       purchased’ (OED n. 4).
 4 ’Sblood God’s blood. A strong oath                   place position, ofﬁce, rank
   expurgated from F.                              12   Evades avoids giving a direct answer to
                                                        (OED v. 3b; earliest citation)
 5 abhor Stress on ﬁrst syllable.                       bombast rhetorically inﬂated or grandil-
6–39 him . . . his Moorship . . . the Moor              oquent. ‘Bombast’ was a form of cotton
   For more than thirty lines the object                wool used to pad doublets, breeches, cod-
   of Iago’s and Roderigo’s outrage re-                 pieces, etc.; hence stuffed (l. 13).
   mains completely anonymous, a dismis-                circumstance circumlocution
   sive stratagem that also serves to arouse       13   stuffed Earliest instance of the
   further curiosity in the audience. When at           metaphorical application of this ppl. a. in
   last he is identiﬁed it is only in contemptu-        OED.
   ously generic terms: not until his entry in          epithets of war specialized military
   1.3, when the Duke needs to exploit his              terminology
   good will, is Othello digniﬁed with his per-    14   And in conclusion A Q-only line that
   sonal name. Cf. 5.2.289, 365.                        Rizvi suggests may represent a linking
 9 Off-capped removed their hats (as a                  phrase inserted by the scribe to replace an
   gesture of deference). First citation in             illegible passage. Something is certainly
   OED.                                                 missing from F at this point, however, and
10 I know . . . place Iago’s telling altera-            Q2’s decision to drop the Q1 line is difﬁcult
   tion of the usual deferential expression,            to account for.
   ‘I know my place’ (cf. Twelfth Night,           15   Non-suits my mediators causes my
   2.5.51–2) is emphasized by the subdued               petitioners to withdraw their suit
   word-play in the second half of this line,           Certes assuredly, or ‘to tell the truth’;
   where ‘price’ is explained as the ‘place’ of         sometimes (as here) monosyllabic.
   which he has been deprived (see Introduc-       16   ofﬁcer ofﬁce-holder (here close to ‘lieu-
   tion, pp. 150–4).                                    tenant’, in the sense that it denotes some-
   price personal worth, excellency (OED n.             one capable of deputizing in Othello’s
   7b); but also ‘prize’ (OED n. 14); and ‘the          ‘ofﬁce’)

                                               196
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                     1.1

   Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
   One Michael Cassio, a Florentine—
   A fellow almost damned in a fair wife—                                                      20
   That never set a squadron in the ﬁeld,
   Nor the division of a battle knows
   More than a spinster—unless the bookish theoric,
   Wherein the toga’d consuls can propose
   As masterly as he! Mere prattle without practice                                            25
   Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th’election;

20 damned] f (damn’d); dambd q        24 toga’d] q1 (toged); Tongued f, q2



18 arithmetician As the full title of Digges’s         gested) Iago is speaking loosely, and
   An arithemetical warlike treatise named             means simply that Cassio is a ladies’ man.
   Stratioticos indicates, the study of mathe-         Alternatively it might be taken to imply
   matics was actually recommended by                  that Cassio is already engaged in an adul-
   most theorists of military art. In his epis-        terous affair—something that accords
   tle ‘To the Reader’, Thomas Digges set out          with Iago’s later suspicions of the lieu-
   to counter the resentful arguments of               tenant’s relations with both Desdemona
   those like Iago who, having ‘been in a              and Bianca. Bradshaw (pp. 156–9) argues
   few skirmishes, or taken any degree in              that this is a proleptic reference to Bianca
   ﬁeld . . . thought it . . . a disgrace that         who is to be understood as a Venetian
   anything should be desired in a soldier             courtesan accompanying him to Cyprus
   that wanted in themselves’ (sig. B2). See           (see 4.1.116).
   also Jorgenson, pp. 113–15.                    21   squadron body of troops drawn up in a
19 Florentine i.e. a foreigner (Florence and           defensive square
   Venice being independent city-states).         22   division of a battle organization of an
   Iago’s contempt is conveyed by the extra            army into battle array
   stress placed on the ﬁrst syllable by the      23   unless . . . theoric except as a matter of
   preceding succession of three unstressed            academic theorizing
   syllables. Honigmann may be right in           24   toga’d consuls A contemptuously
   supposing that the familiar association of          anachronistic description of the civilian
   Florence with the craft of Machiavelli is           authorities in Venice; the toga (a garment
   relevant in the context of Iago’s disdain           worn in peacetime by the citizens of
   for ‘bookish theoric’, especially in view of        ancient Rome) sarcastically alludes to
   the irony that Iago himself is the true             their lack of military expertise. Q1’s read-
   machiavel of the play.                              ing has been generally accepted; but the
20 damned in a fair wife Apparently based              fact that the editor of Q2 preferred F’s
   on the Italian proverb ‘L’hai tolta bella?          ‘tongued’ should give pause for thought
   Tuo danno’ (‘Have you a fair wife? Then             (see App. B, pp. 407–8), especially since
   you’re damned’), this clearly expresses             OED records no earlier instance of either
   both Iago’s misogyny and his sexual envy            word. ‘Tongued’ (= loquacious) would
   of Cassio; but its precise reference, which         certainly make acceptable sense here,
   provokes ﬁve pages of commentary in                 forming a chain of association with
   Furness, remains obscure. It may repre-             ‘spinster’ (loquacity being regarded as a
   sent a change of intention on Shake-                typically feminine characteristic) and
   speare’s part, since there is no evidence in        ‘prattle’.
   the play that Cassio is married; it may             propose discourse; put forward a scheme
   mean that Cassio is on the brink of mar-       25   prattle without practice Cf. Dent
   riage to a beautiful woman, and will soon           P550.1, ‘More prattle than practice’
   suffer the consequences (cuckoldry in               (1611).
   Iago’s opinion); or perhaps (as Ridley sug-    26   had th’election was chosen

                                              197
1.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  And I—of whom his eyes had seen the proof
  At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds,
  Christened and heathen—must be beleed and calmed
  By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster,                                             30
  He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
  And I—God bless the mark!—his Moorship’s ensign.
roderigo
  By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman!
iago
  Why, there’s no remedy, ’tis the curse of service:
  Preferment goes by letter and affection,                                                   35

28 Cyprus] f (Ciprus); Cipres q (throughout)      other] q; others f 29 Christened] f
(Christen’d), q2; Christian q1 be beleed] f (be-leed), q2; be led q1; be leed heath conj.
32 God bless the mark] q1; (blesse the marke) f; Sir (blesse the marke) q2 Moorship’s] f
(Mooreships), q2; Worships q1 ensign] f (Auntient), q (Ancient); so throughout, various
spellings 34 Why] f; But q


27 eyes . . . proof A casual anticipation of     30 counter-caster Apparently Shake-
   the play’s obsession with ‘ocular proof’.        speare’s coinage (OED).
28 Rhodes . . . Cyprus Important island          31 in good time opportunely (sarcastic)
   strongholds in the struggle between           32 God . . . mark ‘An apologetic or im-
   Venice and Turkey for control of the East-       patient exclamation when something
   ern Mediterranean. After a failed attack         horrible or disgusting has been said’
   in 1480, Rhodes was ﬁnally captured by           (OED, mark, n.1 18).
   the Turks in 1522; the Venetians retained        his Moorship Sarcastically coined mock
   control of Cyprus until 1571 when the            honoriﬁc (cf. ‘his worship’).
   principal city of Famagusta fell to a year-      ensign standard-bearer (see ‘Persons of
   long siege.                                      the Play’, above)
29 Christened Here again Q2 prefers the F        34 service military service; serving a
   reading which there seems no particular          master. The two meanings were closer in
   reason to change, since ‘christened’ could       the 17th century when captains appoint-
   be applied to land as well as people (cf.        ed their own ofﬁcers, who were thus effec-
   Drayton (1596), ‘As well in Christened as        tively in the individual service of their
   in heathen land’, cited in OED).                 commanders; but it is typical of Iago’s
   beleed cut off from the wind and                 social resentment that he more than once
   becalmed (as a ship is by another vessel’s       equivocates on the military and domestic
   standing in the way). Many editors are           connotations of the word (see e.g.
   persuaded by Heath’s emendation (‘be             1.1.41–54), as though his military rank
   leed’), which can be justiﬁed as lying           were a mark of servile inferiority.
   behind Q1’s ‘be led’, as well as being met-   35–6 Preferment . . . gradation promo-
   rically more regular; but ‘heathen’ (like        tion is decided by patronage, by letters of
   ‘heaven’) can be treated as monosyllabic,        recommendation and by favouritism, not
   and Q2 once again opts for the F reading.        by the old system of seniority (a frequent
   OED cites no examples of ‘lee’ used as a         complaint in early modern military cir-
   verb in this way, and gives this passage as      cles). Henry Knyvett, for example,
   its only instance of ‘belee’.                    advocates returning to ‘the ancient
30 debitor . . . creditor . . . counter-            custom . . . to rise from place to place
   caster Iago dismisses Cassio as a mere           even from private soldiers to every degree
   pen pusher or accountant; ironically it is       in the ﬁeld not above a colonel, as the for-
   he himself who typically employs the lan-        tune of the wars may afford their worthy
   guage and calculus of accounting (cf.            actions; and not to be chopped and
   ‘price . . . worth’, l. 15).                     changed and misplaced for favour, as

                                             198
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      1.1

  And not by old gradation, where each second
  Stood heir to th’ ﬁrst. Now sir, be judge yourself
  Whether I in any just term am assigned
  To love the Moor?
roderigo I would not follow him then.                                                           40
iago O sir, content you.
  I follow him to serve my turn upon him.
  We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
  Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
  Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave                                                        45
  That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
  Wears out his time, much like his master’s ass,
36 And not by] f; Not by the q     38 assigned] q1; Afﬁn’d f, q2      43 all be] f, q2; be all q1

    nowadays to the great discouragement                al. (eds.), Shakespeare in the Mediterranean
    of forward spirits is so much used’                 (Newark, Del., 2004), 215–92. Stratioticos
    (The Defence of the Realme, 1596 (Oxford,           urges that the ensign should be ‘a man of
    1906), pp. 60–1). Iago’s complaint is of            good account, honest and virtuous, that
    course completely inconsistent with his             the captain may repose afﬁance in, and
    assertion that Othello ignored the pres-            not as some captains fondly do commit
    sure brought to bear by his own inﬂuen-             the same to some of his inferior servants’
    tial friends, and indeed with his claim that        (sig. O4v).
    he ought to have been promoted as the          42   serve . . . upon him exploit him in pur-
    better soldier; but his inconsistencies do          suit of my own interests (Dent TT25).
    not necessarily mean that his expressed             Iago’s quibble on ‘serve’ (see above, l. 34)
    motives are merely concocted (see Intro-            also has an edge of menace, by associa-
    duction, pp. 31–2).                                 tion with serve = deal blows; play a trick;
                                                        do a bad turn (OED v. 45).
38 in . . . term under any fair and reason-        44   You shall mark you may readily observe
    able conditions of service (usually plural)    45   knee-crooking abjectly bowing
    assigned designated, directed, required             knave (a) servant, menial; (b) one of low
    (OED v. 6–7). Despite Q2’s endorsement              degree; (c) rogue
    of F, Q seems to offer the better reading      46   obsequious compliant; sycophantic
    here, since the word has speciﬁcally mili-          (with a quibble on its derivation from the
    tary resonances and is consistent with the          Latin sequor = follow). OED’s earliest cita-
    bitter quibbling on Iago’s rank that con-           tion for this derogatory use of a word
    tinues with ‘ﬂag and sign of love’ (l. 156).        that had originally meant merely ‘dutiful’
    Afﬁned would be an easy misreading for              is from Marston’s Antonio and Mellida
    ‘assi[g]ned’ when written with the long             (1602); the older, complimentary mean-
    ‘s’. It is usually defended as = ‘bound by          ing is still preserved in Hamlet (1.2.92)
    any tie’, though this is the only instance          dating from the same year. The shift in
    of this meaning cited in OED.                       meaning is symptomatic of changing atti-
40 I . . . then The line is metrically amphibi-         tudes to service (see Introduction, pp.
    ous: i.e. it can be treated as completing           149–50).
    both lines 39 and 41.The scansion requires     47   his master’s ass In scripture the ass
    a slurring together of ‘Follow him’.                (which carried Christ into Jerusalem) is a
40, 42, 44 follow serve                                 type of servantly compliance: ‘The ox
41–65 O sir . . . I am For discussion of this           knoweth his owner, and the ass his mas-
    speech in the context of the play’s treat-          ter’s crib’ (Isaiah 1: 3); but Iago probably
    ment of service, see Introduction, pp.              intends a sly reference to Balaam’s ass,
    150–1, 160–1; and Michael Neill, ‘ “His             an exemplar of justiﬁed disobedience.
    Master’s Ass:” Slavery, Service, and Sub-           Balaam’s ass deﬁed the punishments of
    ordination in Othello’, in Tom Clayton et           its master for refusing to carry him past

                                               199
1.1                            Othello, the Moor of Venice

   For naught but provender, and when he’s old—
          cashiered.
   Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are
   Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,                                                   50
   Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
   And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
   Do well thrive by them, and when they have lined their
          coats
   Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
   And such a one do I profess myself—for, sir,                                                  55
   It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
   Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
48 naught] f; noughe q       53 them] f; em q       54 These] f; those q   57 Moor] f, q (Moore);
Moor’s kellner conj.

    the angel of the Lord, by reminding him of       52 throwing directing towards, offering;
    its lifetime of service: ‘Am not I thine ass,       usually with a suggestion of hostility or
    upon which thou hast ridden ever since I            contempt (OED, throw, v.1 15a).
    was thine own?’ (Numbers 22: 30).                53 Do . . . coats Can be scanned as a hexa-
                                                        meter; but Q’s by ’em suggests that elision
48 provender food (esp. dry food for horses,            was intended, and with the easy further
   etc.)                                                elision of they have this will produce a
   cashiered Though it can be metrically                pentameter.
   accommodated by treating this line as a              lined their coats A servant wore a liv-
   hexameter, this word should perhaps be               ery-coat (or ‘blue-coat’); Iago’s alteration
   treated as a part-line on its own, since a           of the more usual ‘lined their pockets’
   pause after old would be dramatically                reﬂects his bitter obsession with the
   appropriate. The verb to cashier was a               marks of servile status.
   newly coined term-of-art, apparently              54 Do themselves homage become their
   imported by soldiers returning from the              own masters. Homage was the formal
   Low Countries in 1585, and Iago should               action by which a vassal declared himself
   probably produce it with something of a              the ‘man’ of a feudal lord or master and
   ﬂourish—especially since it plays on                 bound himself to his service.
   Cassio’s name (which could itself mean               soul i.e. spirit
   ‘cashiered’; see ‘Persons’) and on his            56 Roderigo As sometimes happens with
   alleged mercenary credentials as a                   proper names in Shakespeare (e.g.
   ‘counter-caster’ (l. 30).                            Coriolanus), the pronunciation of this
49 Whip me . . . knaves for my part I’d like            name appears to vary: here the metre
   to see all such honest menials whipped.              requires the sounding of all four syllables,
   Me is a so-called ‘ethic [or ethical] dative’,       with a stress on the third (‘Roderigo’).
   a relatively common construction in                  More commonly, it is trisyllabic; either, as
   Shakespearian English, implying that a               at l. 172, with the stress on the penulti-
   person other than the subject or object of           mate syllable (‘Rod’rigo’), or, as at l. 95,
   the sentence has an indirect interest in             with the stress on the ﬁrst syllable
   the stated facts.                                    (‘Rod’rigo’).
   honest knaves An oxymoronic quibble               57 Were . . . Iago The ﬁrst of a number of
   on knave = villain; whipping was the usual           oddly gnomic formulations that charac-
   punishment for one judged to be a dishon-            terize Iago’s devious way of speaking. It
   est knave.                                           seems to mean something like ‘If I were
50 trimmed in forms and visages decked                  able to rise to the position of mastery now
   in the conventional appearances                      occupied by Othello, I would have no wish
51 attending on serving                                 to return to my present servile status.’

                                                200
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.1

  In following him, I follow but myself—
  Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
  But seeming so for my peculiar end;                                                      60
  For when my outward action doth demonstrate
  The native act and ﬁgure of my heart
  In compliment extern, ’tis not long after
  But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
  For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.                                                  65
roderigo
  What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe
  If he can carry’t thus?
iago                      Call up her father:
  Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
61 doth] f, q2; does q1 65 daws] f (Dawes), q2; Doues q1 66 full] q; fall f thick-lips] q
(thicklips); Thicks-lips f1; Thicke-lips f2 67 carry’t] f, q2; carry’et q1 father:] f; ~, q
   But, in the context of Iago’s bitter obses-   65 daws The proverbial foolishness of jack-
   sion with the humiliations of service,           daws was expressed in their appetite for
   Kellner’s conjecture (p. 132) that QF            gawdy triﬂes. Q’s ‘doves’, though an easy
   ‘Moore’ is a mistake for ‘Moors’ or              misreading for ‘dawes’, is defensible since
   ‘Moores’ (i.e. Moor’s) is worth considera-       doves are associated with love, and so
   tion: in which case Iago would mean ‘If I        might be sarcastically linked to the tender
   really belonged to the Moor (were the            heart that Iago despises.
   Moor’s true servant) then I would not be         I . . . am Another of Iago’s teasingly
   the man I am.’                                   obscure formulations; parodying the
                                                    scriptural name of God, ‘I am that I am’
59 not I for I don’t do this out of                 (Exodus 3: 14), which Shakespeare also
60 peculiar end private purposes                    plays with in Sonnet 121 and in Richard
61 demonstrate exhibit. Placing the accent          III, it seems to mean something like ‘I am
   on the second syllable, as required by the       playing a role that does not correspond to
   metre, will make the word resonate with          my true nature’. For a similarly gestic use
   the play’s obsessive anxiety about the           of ‘I am’, see Antony, 1.3.13, ‘I am sick
   ‘monstrous’—to which it was in any case          and sullen’ (= ‘Watch me do my sick and
   linked by the false etymology which              sullen act’).
   derived ‘monster’ from the Latin monstro      66 full fortune abundant or perfect good
   (show).                                          luck (perhaps with a glance at Desde-
62 native innate, natural                           mona’s dowry)
   act and ﬁgure activity and form. Per-            thick-lips A strong indication that
   haps, since Iago is contrasting ‘visages of      Shakespeare conceived his Moor as a
   duty’ with his inner truth, a play on            black African. A Shakespearian coinage
   French ﬁgure (face) is involved.                 (OED). See Introduction, ﬁg. 7.
63 compliment extern outward exhibi-                owe own
   tions of courtesy. But as ‘complement’        67 carry’t thus succeed in this way; get
   and ‘compliment’ were not distinct in            away with this
   early 17th-century usage, it may also sug-    68–9 Rouse . . . Proclaim him Editors are
   gest outward behaviour that comple-              divided as to whether the pronouns refer
   ments and completes the feelings of the          to Othello (as F’s punctuation might sug-
   heart.                                           gest), or to Brabantio (as Q appears to
64 wear . . . sleeve expose my feelings to          indicate). Though ‘rouse’ might seem to
   everyone (the earliest example of this           anticipate the noisy waking of Brabantio
   proverbial phrase in OED; see heart, n.          which follows, the other injunctions seem
   15f). Servants wore their badge of house-        more appropriate to Othello.
   hold allegiance upon their sleeve.            68 make after pursue

                                             201
1.1                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen,
  And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,                                            70
  Plague him with ﬂies: though that his joy be joy,
  Yet throw such chances of vexation on’t
  As it may lose some colour.
roderigo
  Here is her father’s house, I’ll call aloud.
iago
  Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell                                            75
  As when, by night and negligence, the ﬁre
  Is spied in populous cities.
roderigo
  What ho! Brabantio, Signor Brabantio, ho!
iago
  Awake! What ho, Brabantio! Thieves, thieves, thieves!
  Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!                                     80
  Thieves, thieves!
        Enter Brabantio at a window above
brabantio
  What is the reason of this terrible summons?
  What is the matter there?
roderigo
  Signor, is all your family within?


69 streets] f; streete q 72 chances] f; changes q; charges walker conj. on’t] f; out q
78 Signor] q (‘Seignior’ throughout); Siginor f (elsewhere ‘Signior’) 79 Thieves, thieves,
thieves] q (theeues); Theeues, Theeues f 80 your daughter] f, q2; you ~ q1 81.1 Enter Bra-
bantio . . . above] This edition; Bra. Aboue. f (as speech preﬁx); Brabantio at a window q



69 Proclaim denounce as a traitor or               buildings were destroyed by ﬁres in 1594
   outlaw                                          and 1596 (Wells, All Time, p. 28).
70–1 though . . . ﬂies though he is in         80 house . . . bags Desdemona is regarded
   a state of apparent good fortune                simply as an item in Brabantio’s cata-
   and happiness, torment him with                 logue of property. Cf. Shylock’s reported
   miseries                                        reaction to his daughter’s abduction in
71–3 though . . . As Paraphrases the previ-        Merchant, 2.8.15–22.
   ous metaphor: ‘no matter how real his       81.1 window above Most Elizabethan play-
   happiness may be, taint it with such in-        houses had a balcony or ‘tarras’ that
   furiating possibilities that’.                  could serve either as a playing space for
73 colour ground or reason for its                 action ‘above’, or to accommodate spec-
   existence                                       tators when not so required; in some
75 timorous fearful, terrifying                    cases it seems to have been ﬂanked by
76 by night . . . ﬁre a nocturnal ﬁre caused       windows, placed above the entry doors on
   by negligence. In Stratford, hundreds of        the main stage.

                                           202
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.1

iago
  Are your doors locked?
brabantio                 Why? Wherefore ask you this?                                        85
iago
  ’Swounds, sir, you’re robbed; for shame, put on your
       gown!
  Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul:
  Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
  Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise!
  Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,                                                 90
  Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
  Arise, I say!
brabantio      What, have you lost your wits?
roderigo
  Most reverend signor, do you know my voice?
brabantio Not I; what are you?
roderigo My name is Roderigo.                                                                 95
brabantio The worser welcome:
  I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors:
  In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
  My daughter is not for thee; and now in madness,
  Being full of supper, and distempering draughts,                                          100
  Upon malicious bravery, dost thou come
85 Are . . . locked] f, q2; Are all doore lockts? q1 86 ’Swounds] q1 (Zounds); not in f, q2
you’re] f (y’are); you are q 88 now, now, very] f; now, very q 96 worser] f (worsser);
worse q 101 bravery] q; knauerie f
86 ’Swounds by Christ’s wounds (a strong               (ewe/you) that makes Brabantio the vic-
   oath)                                               tim of Othello’s violation by identifying
   gown i.e. the ‘nightgown’ in which Bra-             the daughter as a mere extension of the
   bantio appears at l. 158.1.                         patriarchal body, see Neill, ‘Places’,
88 black ram Apart from the ram’s associa-             pp. 208–36.
   tion with lust and sexual potency, its           90 snorting snoring (perhaps with a further
   blackness (like its horns) suggests that it is      suggestion of animality)
   an incarnation of the devil (cf. l. 91). The     93 reverend worthy of respect
   animal imagery here and elsewhere in the         95 My . . . Roderigo An amphibious line:
   play presents miscegenation as a violation          Roderigo is trisyllablic (see l. 56 n.).
   of the natural order: something literally        96 worser Double comparative; common in
   monstrous, in the sense that monsters               Shakespeare.
   were supposed to be the offspring of             100 distempering draughts intoxicating
   unnatural coupling between different                drinks
   kinds of creatures. Devils too were              101 bravery deﬁance, bravado. F’s ‘knav-
   often represented as having monstrous               ery’, though it makes reasonable sense, is
   shapes.                                             an easy misreading and misses the point
89 tupping copulating with (from the                   of Brabantio’s indignation, which is that
   northern dialect tup = ram; ﬁrst use of the         Roderigo, despite having been sent pack-
   verb cited in OED)                                  ing, has stubbornly persisted in returning
   white ewe For the subdued pun                       to the house.

                                                203
1.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  To start my quiet.
roderigo             Sir, sir, sir—
brabantio                      But thou must needs be sure
  My spirit and my place have in their power
  To make this bitter to thee.
roderigo                         Patience, good sir!
brabantio
  What tell’st thou me of robbing? This is Venice:                                       105
  My house is not a grange.
roderigo                       Most grave Brabantio,
  In simple and pure soul, I come to you.
iago ’Swounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve
  God if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you
  service, and you think we are rufﬁans, you’ll have your                                110
  daughter covered with a Barbary horse, you’ll have your
  nephews neigh to you, you’ll have coursers for cousins
  and jennets for germans.
brabantio
  What profane wretch art thou?
iago I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and                              115
  the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.

103 spirit] q; spirits f   their] f; them q 105 What tell’st] f; What, tell’st q 108
’Swounds] q1 (Zouns); not in f, q2 110 and] f; not in q 115 comes] f; come q 116 now]
q; not in f


102 start my quiet disturb my peace                 man neighed after his neighbour’s wife’;
   Sir, sir, sir— An extra-metrical inter-          and 13: 27: ‘I have seen thine adulteries,
   ruption. The fact that Brabantio com-            and thy neighings, the ﬁlthiness of thy
   pletes his own verse line may indicate that      whoredom . . . and thine abominations’
   he speaks over the top of Roderigo’s inter-      (Geneva Bible, 1560). The second passage
   ruption.                                         closely follows that in which the prophet
103 spirit character; mettle, willingness to        identiﬁes blackness as the mark of
   assert myself                                    ingrained sin: ‘Can the black Moor
   place rank, ofﬁce                                change his skin . . .?’ (13: 23).
106 grange country house (isolated and              coursers chargers, war-horses; stallions
   vulnerable)                                      (with a pun on ‘corsair’ = Barbary
107 simple honest, straightforward                  pirate)
111 covered with mated by                           cousins Punning on ‘cozen’ = deceive,
   Barbary horse Arab stallion (with a              beguile. For Shakespeare’s habitual word-
   quibble on ‘barbarian’); i.e. the Moor,          play on cousin and german (l. 113), see
   Othello. ‘Barbary’ was strictly the home         Parker, Margins, pp. 127–36, 154–5,
   of the Barbary Moors (Berbers), west of          177–8.
   Egypt, but sometimes referred more loose-     113 jennet small Spanish horse
   ly to the larger North African littoral.         germans close relatives (with a quibble
112 nephews grandsons (OED 3)                       on Germans)
   neigh Cf. Jeremiah 5: 8: ‘They rose up in     114 profane foul-mouthed
   the morning like fed horses: for every        116 making . . . backs copulating. Italian

                                             204
                                Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   1.1

brabantio
  Thou art a villain.
iago                  You are a senator.
brabantio
  This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
roderigo
  Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you,
  If’t be your pleasure and most wise consent—                                                120
  As partly I ﬁnd it is—that your fair daughter,
  At this odd-even and dull watch o’th’ night,
  Transported with no worse nor better guard
  But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
  To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor—                                                   125
  If this be known to you and your allowance,
  We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.
  But if you know not this, my manners tell me
  We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
  That from the sense of all civility                                                         130
  I thus would play and triﬂe with your reverence.
  Your daughter—if you have not given her leave—
  I say again hath made a gross revolt,
  Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
  In an extravagant and wheeling stranger,                                                    135

120–36 If . . . yourself] f, q2; not in q1    122 odd-even] malone; odde Euen f

    and French proverb (Dent B151): Far la           121 As . . . is as [given your response to our
    bestia a due dossi; faire la beste a deux dos.      news] I half think it must be
    See e.g. Rabelais, 1.3; 5.30 (Honigmann).        122 odd-even Usually explained by refer-
                                                        ence to Macbeth, 3.4.125–6: ‘What is the
117 Thou . . . You Iago responds to Braban-             night? | Almost at odds with morning,
   tio’s contemptuous ‘thou’ with sarcastic             which is which.’ Johnson suggested that
   mock-politeness.                                     ‘the even of night is midnight, the time
   villain Not merely ‘scoundrel’ but also              when night is divided into even parts’;
   ‘low-born peasant’.                                  thus odd might indicate a time on either
118 answer answer for                                   side of the midnight hour.
120–36 If’t . . . yourself The incomplete               dull gloomy, dark; drowsy
   syntax of the sentence begun by ‘I                126 and . . . allowance and has your
   beseech you’ might suggest, as Honig-                approval
   mann once argued, that these lines were           127 saucy insolent
   added to F (‘Revised Plays’, pp. 161–2);          130 from contrary to
   but Shakespeare sometimes uses such               133 gross ﬂagrant; disgusting
   incompletion to register the speaker’s            135 extravagant wandering, vagrant (a
   emotional excitement; and Honigmann                  characteristic attributed to barbarians
   himself (Texts, p. 12) now argues that,              generally: cf. erring barbarian, 1.3.348–9)
   because Brabantio’s questioning at ll.               wheeling giddy, restless, wandering (see
   162–7 seems to refer back to this passage,           OED ppl. a. d, citing this as the earliest
   a cut must have been involved.                       example)

                                                 205
1.1                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself:
  If she be in her chamber or your house,
  Let loose on me the justice of the state
  For thus deluding you.
brabantio                  Strike on the tinder, ho!
  Give me a taper. Call up all my people.                                                140
  This accident is not unlike my dream;
  Belief of it oppresses me already.
  Light, I say, light!                           Exit Brabantio
iago                   Farewell, for I must leave you.
  It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place
  To be produced—as, if I stay, I shall—                                                 145
  Against the Moor; for I do know the state—
  However this may gall him with some check—
  Cannot with safety cast him. For he’s embarked
  With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars
  (Which even now stands in act) that, for their souls,                                  150
  Another of his fathom they have none,
  To lead their business; in which regard,
  Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
  Yet, for necessity of present life,
139 For . . . you] f, q2; For this delusion q1 143 Exit] f; not in q 144 place] f, q2; pate q1
145 produced] q (produc’d); producted f 147 However] f, q (corr.) (How euer); Now euer q
(uncorr.) 148 cast him] q; cast-him f 151 none] f, q2; not q1 153 hell pains] dyce (hell-
paines); hells paines q; hell apines f
   stranger The usual term for ‘foreigner’          form; but, since there are no other
   or ‘alien’.                                      instances in Shakespeare and it disrupts
                                                    the metre without altering the meaning,
136 Of here and everywhere of no ﬁxed               F probably reﬂects a simple misreading.
   abode                                         147 gall . . . check bring the trouble of a
139 Strike . . . tinder strike up a light. A        reproof upon him. Sanders suggests a
   reminder that the scene (though played in        subdued equestrian metaphor: ‘slightly
   daylight on the Globe stage) is imagined         hurt a horse by pulling back the rein’.
   as taking place in the dark. Like Macbeth,    148 cast cast off, discharge
   Othello contains an unusually high num-          embarked involved (in), committed (to)
   ber of night scenes (1.1–3; 2.3; 5.1–2)       149 With . . . reason for such clamorously
   which help to set the mood of the play and       urgent reasons
   resonate with its black–white, light–dark     150 stands in act are under way (a singular
   symbolism.                                       verb with a plural noun is not uncommon
140 taper wax candle                                in Shakespeare, especially when, as in the
141 accident misfortune                             case of wars, the noun can be thought of
142 oppresses me weighs heavily on my               as a collective).
   spirits                                          for their souls to save their souls
144 meet ﬁtting                                  151 fathom depth of understanding, grasp;
   place position (as Othello’s ensign)             ability (OED n. 2b; ﬁrst example of this
145 produced i.e. as a witness. F’s ‘product-       usage)
   ed’ is a possible reading, since ‘product’    154 life livelihood
   sometimes occurs as an alternative verbal

                                            206
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.1

  I must show out a ﬂag and sign of love—                                                  155
  Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely ﬁnd him,
  Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
  And there will I be with him. So farewell.               Exit
         Enter Brabantio in his nightgown, and servants with
         torches
brabantio
  It is too true an evil. Gone she is;
  And what’s to come of my despisèd time                                                   160
  Is naught but bitterness. Now Roderigo,
  Where didst thou see her?—O, unhappy girl!—
  With the Moor sayst thou?—Who would be a father?—
  How didst thou know ’twas she?—O, she deceives me
  Past thought!—What said she to you?—Get more
         tapers;                                                                           165
  Raise all my kindred.—Are they married, think you?
roderigo
  Truly, I think they are.
brabantio
  O heaven, how got she out? O treason of the blood!
  Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters’ minds
  By what you see them act. Is there not charms                                            170

157 Sagittary] f (Sagitary); Sagittar q 158.1–2 Enter . . . torches] q; Enter Brabantio, with
Seruants and Torches. f 161 bitterness. Now] f; ~Ÿ now q 164 she deceives] f, q2; thou
deceiuest q1

155 ﬂag and sign Playing ironically on            158.1 nightgown ‘an ankle-length gown
   Iago’s ‘place’ as Othello’s ensign or             with long sleeves and collar . . . worn for
   standard-bearer.                                  warmth both indoors and out’ (M. C.
156 sign show, pretence (punning on sign =           Linthicum, Costume in the Drama of Shake-
   standard)                                         speare and his Contemporaries (Oxford,
157 Sagittary an inn with the sign of Sagit-         1936), p. 184).
   tarius (one of the twelve signs of the Zodi-   160 what’s . . . time the rest of my despic-
   ac, depicting a centaur with a bow and            able life
   arrow). The Centaur was a monster with         165 Past thought beyond belief
   the body of a horse and torso of a man:        168 treason of the blood Brabantio’s
   the inn-sign thus becomes another per-            exclamation plays on several senses of
   verted ‘sign of love’ with an ironic appro-       blood: Desdemona’s elopement is a viola-
   priateness to the union of Othello and            tion of her noble nature and lineage
   Desdemona which Iago has already                  (blood); a betrayal of duty to her family
   depicted as a monstrous coupling of horse         (blood) and especially to her father
   and woman (ll. 110–13); see above, pp.            (whose authority, in patriarchal theory,
   140–1. Calderwood notes the monster’s             was directly analogous to that of a
   ancient signiﬁcance as a symbol of lust,          monarch); and an instance of treacher-
   barbarism, and (through the Centaurs’             ous rebellion against the sovereign reason
   assault on Lapith women) the violation of         by rebellious passion (blood).
   kind (pp. 22–5, 36).                           170 charms magical devices, spells

                                              207
1.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  By which the property of youth and maidhood
  May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
  Of some such thing?
roderigo                Yes sir, I have indeed.
brabantio
  Call up my brother!—O, would you had had her!—
  Some one way, some another!—Do you know                                                   175
  Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
roderigo
  I think I can discover him, if you please
  To get good guard and go along with me.
brabantio
  Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call—
  I may command at most. Get weapons, ho!                                                   180
  And raise some special ofﬁcers of night:
  On, good Roderigo; I will deserve your pains. Exeunt

1.2     Enter Othello, Iago, and attendants with torches
iago
   Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
   Yet do I hold it very stuff o’th’ conscience
   To do no contrived murder: I lack iniquity
   Sometime to do me service. Nine, or ten times
171 maidhood] f; manhood q 173 Yes . . . indeed] f, q2; I haue sir q1 174 would] f, q2;
that q1 179 Pray . . . on] f, q2; Pray leade me on q1 181 night] q1; might f, q2 183 I
will] f; Ile q
  1.2] f (Scena Secunda); not in q 0.1 and] q; f omits 2 stuff o’th’] f (stuffe), q2; stuft of q1
4 Sometime] f; Sometimes q

171 property nature (what is proper to                night’ (pp. 96–8). Charged with ensuring
   something)                                         ‘that there be not any disorder done in
172 abused deceived, taken advantage of;              the darkness of the night, which always
   perverted (from its natural condition);            emboldeneth men ill-disposed to naughti-
   violated, ravished                                 ness, and that there be not any houses
174 brother Presumably Gratiano (see                  broken up, nor thieves, nor rogues lurk-
   5.2.199).                                          ing in corners with intent to do violence’
177 discover Literally ‘uncover’, ‘reveal’; a         (p. 98), these ofﬁcials had authority to
   term with speciﬁc theatrical resonances,           punish minor offences with summary
   appropriate to a play obsessed with the            imprisonment or whipping.
   hidden scene of erotic consummation            182 deserve your pains recompense you
   that is ﬁnally revealed when Desdemona’s           for your trouble
   bed is ‘discovered’ in the last scene (see     1.2.2 very stuff essential substance
   5.2.0.1).                                       3 contrived premeditated
181 ofﬁcers of night The role of these ofﬁ-        4 do me service serve my turn (a
   cials (one elected from each of the city’s         subdued allegory, in which the vice
   six ‘tribes’) is described in Lewkenor in a        Iniquity is imagined as Iago’s potential
   passage marginally annotated ‘Ofﬁcers of           servant)

                                             208
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                     1.2

  I had thought t’have yerked him here, under the ribs.                                          5
othello
  ’Tis better as it is.
iago                   Nay, but he prated,
  And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
  Against your honour
  That, with the little godliness I have,
  I did full hard forbear him. But I pray, sir,                                                 10
  Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
  That the magniﬁco is much beloved,
  And hath in his effect a voice potential
  As double as the Duke’s: he will divorce you,
  Or put upon you what restraint and grievance                                                  15
  The law, with all his might to enforce it on,
  Will give him cable.
othello                 Let him do his spite:
  My services which I have done the Signory
  Shall out-tongue his complaints. ’Tis yet to know—
  Which, when I know that boasting is an honour,                                               20
  I shall provulgate—I fetch my life and being

5 yerked] f; ierk’d q 10 pray] q; pray you f 11 Be assured] f; For be sure q 15 and] q;
or f 16 The] f, q2; That q1 17 Will] f; Weele q 20 Which . . . know] f, q2; not in q1
21 provulgate—] q1 (~,); promulgate. f, q2


 5 yerked struck (usually with a rod or                 England (1549); but Lewkenor would have
   whip, but here with a dagger). Q’s ierked            informed Shakespeare otherwise.
   (jerked) probably means the same thing,         15   grievance suffering, punishment
   since the two words have a common               16   his its
   derivation and were not wholly distinct at      17   give him cable give him rope (or scope)
   this time.                                      18   Signory Signoria (the governing body of
 7 scurvy insulting, contemptible                       Venice)
10 I . . . him it was difﬁcult to resist attack-   19   out-tongue speak louder than (ﬁrst use
   ing him                                              cited in OED)
11 fast ﬁrmly. Perhaps implying sexual con-             ’Tis . . . know it is not yet generally
   summation, since non-consummation                    known that
   could be cited as grounds for dissolution       21   provulgate publish abroad, make widely
   of a marriage (cf. 2.3.15–17).                       known (in this context with a mildly
12 magniﬁco The magniﬁci were the mag-                  derogatory suggestion, deriving from its
   nates or nobility of Venice (cf. Merchant,           etymological connection with the Latin
   3.2.278).                                            vulgus = crowd, mob, common people). By
13–14 hath . . . Duke’s has a voice poten-              implication the true aristocrat should dis-
   tially as inﬂuential as the Duke’s, which is         dain such self-advertisement. As the more
   worth twice that of any other senator.               common word, F’s promulgate (meaning
   Need not imply that the Duke had a cast-             much the same thing, but without the
   ing vote—a widespread misconception                  derogatory nuance) is likely to be a simple
   according to William Thomas’s History of             misreading.

                                               209
1.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  From men of royal siege; and my demerits
  May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
  As this that I have reached. For know, Iago,
  But that I love the gentle Desdemona,                                                       25
  I would not my unhousèd free condition
  Put into circumscription and conﬁne
  For the seas’ worth.
       Enter Cassio and Ofﬁcers with lights and torches
                       But look, what lights come yond?
iago
  Those are the raisèd father and his friends:
  You were best go in.
othello                Not I—I must be found:                                                30
  My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
  Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
22 siege] f (Seige); height q 28 Enter . . . torches] q (Enter Cassio with lights, Ofﬁcers, and
torches.); Enter Cassio, with Torches. f (after l. 28) yond] f; yonder q 29 Those] f; These q
32 Is it they?] f, q2; it is they. q1
22 royal siege throne, or seat of empire: a           Brabantio. The dangerous (though often
   synecdoche for royal rank or blood. The            enviable) ‘liberty’ enjoyed by barbarians
   physically impressive David Harewood               is a recurrent theme of both Renaissance
   (National Theatre, 1997) was among the             and classical writers.
   few Othellos to prefer Q’s ‘royal height’,    27   conﬁne conﬁnement
   which looks to be the result of mis-          28   seas’ worth the worth of all the trea-
   reading.                                           sures lying scattered over the sea-bed
   demerits merits                                    (cf. Henry V, 1.2.163–5; Richard III,
23 unbonneted Editors are divided as to               1.4.24–33; Tempest, 1.2.400–4. But Oth-
   whether this means ‘with my hat                    ello may also have in mind the extraordi-
   removed (as a sign of respect)’, i.e. ‘with        nary riches fetched from ocean voyaging
   all due modesty’, or ‘keeping my hat deﬁ-          in this period.
   antly on my head’, i.e. without any false          lights and torches Q’s direction calls for
   modesty. Although the latter reading is            both ‘lights’ and ‘torches’; this may be
   in many ways the more attractive, OED              mere redundancy, but since ‘lights’ (can-
   (which cites this as the ﬁrst appearance of        dles) and ‘torches’ (ﬂaming brands) are
   the word) offers no warrant for it. How-           properly distinct, this massed entry may
   ever, the general sense of the passage is          involve both. For Shakespeare’s audience,
   clear enough: Othello’s merits make him            the context will have activated the icono-
   more than worthy of marriage to Desde-             graphic association of torches with the
   mona (his ‘proud . . . fortune’).                  classical gods of marriage and erotic love
   proud lofty, grand (but with a glance at           (Hymen and Cupid).
   the aristocratic arrogance of Brabantio)      29   raisèd roused from sleep; roused to anger
25 gentle well-born; soft natured                31   parts talents. Calderwood notes, how-
26 unhousèd without a house, household,               ever, that ‘the word . . . turns false and
   or family; hence ‘unconﬁned’. Implicitly           takes on a theatrical cast’, hinting at the
   contrasts Othello’s condition as an un-            histrionic side of Othello’s character
   attached ﬁeld-soldier with that of Braban-         (p. 104).
   tio as the self-conscious householder              title legal rights (as a husband; and per-
   (1.1.105–6); but the ‘free’ and houseless          haps also as a high-ranking soldier in the
   condition that Othello so values is merely         service of the state)
   the other face of the ‘extravagant’,               perfect soul blameless character; clear
   ‘erring’ barbarity denounced by Iago and           conscience

                                             210
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 1.2

iago
  By Janus, I think no.
othello
  The servants of the Duke? And my lieutenant?
  The goodness of the night upon you, friends.                                            35
  What is the news?
cassio                 The Duke does greet you, general;
  And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,
  Even on the instant.
othello                  What is the matter, think you?
cassio
  Something from Cyprus, as I may divine—
  It is a business of some heat: the galleys                                             40
  Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
  This very night at one another’s heels;
  And many of the consuls, raised and met,
  Are at the Duke’s already. You have been hotly called
      for,
  When, being not at your lodging to be found,                                            45
  The Senate hath sent about three several quests
  To search you out.
othello                ’Tis well I am found by you:
  I will but spend a word here in the house,
  And go with you.                                      jExitk
cassio                Ensign, what makes he here?
34 Duke?] q (~,); Dukes? f lieutenant?] f, q2; Leiutenant, q1 35 you, friends] f, q2;
yourŸ ~ q1 41 sequent] f, q2; frequent q1 46 hath sent about] f; sent aboue q 48 I will
but] f; Ile q 49 Exit] rowe; not in f, q

33 Janus Roman god of doors, gateways,            merchants [Consoli di Marcantanti]’ (p.
   and beginnings, the gatekeeper of              107), but he seems to use the term to refer
   Elysium. Traditionally represented as          to members of the Great Council, the
   two-faced, he is an appropriate deity for      principal governing body of the Venetian
   the shifty Iago to invoke.                     Republic.
34 The . . . lieutenant Here, as at ll. 93–4   43 raised roused from their beds; stirred to
   and elsewhere, F’s question marks can          common action
   equally be interpreted as exclamation       44 hotly urgently
   marks, since the two were not always dis-   46 several separate; distinct
   tinguished in early modern orthography.     49–53 Exit . . . Enter Although editors tra-
38 matter business                                ditionally supply these directions, the
39 divine guess                                   action (as Honigmann points out) need
40 heat urgency                                   only require that Othello hold a conversa-
41 sequent successive                             tion at the tiring-house door (the im-
43 consuls Shakespeare could have read in         agined entrance to the Sagittary) whilst
   Lewkenor about ‘certain peculiar Judges,       Iago and Cassio converse downstage.
   called properly Judges or Consuls of the    49 makes does

                                           211
1.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago
  Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land-carrack;                                              50
  If it prove lawful prize, he’s made for ever.
cassio
  I do not understand.
iago                     He’s married.
cassio                                  To who?
iago
  Marry to—
         jEnter Othellok
                 Come, captain, will you go?
othello                                      Have with you.
         Enter Brabantio, Roderigo, and Ofﬁcers with torches,
         lights, and weapons
cassio
  Here comes another troop to seek for you.
iago
  It is Brabantio—general, be advised,                                                         55
  He comes to bad intent.
othello                      Holla, stand there.



50 land-carrack] after q1 (land Carrick); Land Carract f; land Carriact q2 52 who?] f, q1;
whom? q2 53 Enter Othello] rowe (after ‘go’); not in f, q Have with you] f, q2 (Ha’ with
you); Ha, with who? q1 53.1–2 Enter . . . weapons] This edition; Enter Brabantio, Rodorigo,
with Ofﬁcers, and Torches. f (after l. 54); Enters Brabantio, Roderigo, and others with lights and
weapons. q (after ‘To who?’, l. 53) 54 comes another] f (corr.) (come sanother), q; come
another f (uncorr.)




50 boarded A common metaphor for sexual            53 Marry to—Unlike the words that follow
   conquest (perhaps with an additional pun           Iago’s aposiopesis, which produce an
   on ‘bawd’: cf. Romeo, 3.2.21).                     extremely rough hexameter, ‘Desde-
   carrack large galleon (of the sort fre-            mona’ would ﬁt the metre here: the effect
   quently used to transport treasure from            is like that of witholding an expected
   the New World)                                     rhyme at the end of a couplet. Marry =
51 made Perhaps with a sexual innuendo                ‘[by the Virgin] Mary’, by this time a
   (make = seduce).                                   rather mild exclamation.
52 I . . . who? In the light of what is later         Have with you let’s go together. Q2’s
   revealed about his role in Othello’s woo-          ‘Ha’ with you’ suggests the likely reason
   ing, Cassio is presumably (as many editors         for Q1’s misreading.
   suppose) feigning ignorance here, as well       56 to with
   as refusing to comprehend Iago’s bawdy
   innuendo.

                                              212
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      1.2

roderigo
  Signor, it is the Moor.
brabantio                  Down with him, thief.
       Both sides draw their swords
iago
  You, Roderigo? Come, sir, I am for you.
othello
  Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
  Good signor, you shall more command with years                                                60
  Than with your weapons.
brabantio
  O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter?
  Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her;
  For I’ll refer me to all things of sense,
  If she in chains of magic were not bound,                                                     65
  Whether a maid, so tender, fair, and happy,
  So opposite to marriage that she shunned
  The wealthy curlèd darlings of our nation,
  Would ever have, t’incur a general mock,
  Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom                                                      70
  Of such a thing as thou—to fear, not to delight?
57 brabantio] f (Bra.), q2; Cra. q1 Both . . . swords] rowe (subs.); not in q, f 58 You,
Roderigo? Come] f (corr.) (You, Rodorigoc? Cme); You Roderigo, Come q, f (uncorr.) (Rodorigo)
59 them] f; em q 64 things] f, q2; thing q1 65 If . . . bound] f, q2; not in q1 68 dar-
lings] q; Deareling f

57, 62 thief Cf. 1.3.207, 3.3.161, 340–5,               and deformed’ (Discours of Voyages, 1598,
    etc. The play’s recurrent references to             p. 202) or Bacon’s representation of the
    theft are in no sense metaphorical, but             Spirit of Fornication as ‘a little foul ugly
    express the way in which patriarchal                Ethiope’ (see Introduction, p. 127).
    ideology constructed women as, quite           63   Damned For blackness as a sign of
    literally, a species of masculine property.         damnability, see Introduction, p. 1.
58 You, Roderigo? Iago singles out Roderi-              enchanted i.e. taken possession of her
    go in order to conceal the true nature of           through the forbidden ‘black arts’ (cf.
    their relationship.                                 1.1.170–2)
59 Keep . . . swords Honigmann cites John          64   refer . . . sense appeal to the judgement
    18: 1–11, where Christ, betrayed by Judas           of all reasonable creatures
    (as Othello has been by Iago), is arrested     66   fair beautiful; unblemished; unstained,
    by ofﬁcers ‘with lanterns and torches and           of spotless reputation; but also ‘fair-
    weapons’ (18: 3; cf. l. 53.1) and orders            skinned’ in contrast to Othello’s ‘foul’
    Peter ‘Put up thy sword into thy sheath’            blackness (cf. 1.3.288).
    (18: 11).                                           happy Not merely ‘contented’ but also
60–2 you . . . thou Cf. 1.1.117–118.                    ‘fortunate’.
62, 73 foul loathsome; wicked; ugly; dirty;        67   opposite opposed, hostile
    discoloured. As the opposite of ‘fair’, foul   70   her guardage the guardianship of her
    can sometimes mean ‘dark’ or ‘black’ as             father (ﬁrst use cited in OED)
    well as ‘ugly’, as in Linschoten’s descrip-    71   to fear . . . delight (one calculated) to
    tion of the ‘Moors of Guinea, that are foul         cause fear rather than delight

                                               213
1.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Judge me the world, if ’tis not gross in sense,
  That thou hast practised on her with foul charms,
  Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
  That weakens motion. I’ll have’t disputed on—                                            75
  ’Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
  I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
  For an abuser of the world, a practiser
  Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.
  Lay hold upon him! If he do resist,                                                     80
  Subdue him at his peril.
othello                     Hold your hands,
  Both you of my inclining and the rest!
  Were it my cue to ﬁght, I should have known it
  Without a prompter. Whither will you that I go
  To answer this your charge?
brabantio                       To prison, till ﬁt time                                    85
  Of law and course of direct session
  Call thee to answer.
othello                What if I do obey?
  How may the Duke be therewith satisﬁed,
  Whose messengers are here about my side
  Upon some present business of the state,                                                90
  To bring me to him.
ofﬁcer                 ’Tis true, most worthy signor:
  The Duke’s in council, and your noble self
  I am sure is sent for.

72–7 Judge . . . attach thee] f, q2 (‘’Tis portable’, l. 76); not in q1 78 For] f, q2; Such q1
84 Whither] f (Whether); where q 85 To answer] f, q2; And ~ q1 87 I] q; not in f
91 bring] f; beare q


72–7 Judge . . . thee Almost certainly a cut     75 weakens motion render the emotions
   from Q (along with l. 65), as Ridley notes:      and desires more vulnerable
   the substitution of ‘Such an abuser’             disputed on debated, investigated
   covers the join only roughly, since it is     77 attach arrest
   not Othello’s supposed dabbling in ‘arts      78 abuser deceiver, corrupter
   inhibited’ but his ‘sooty bosom’ that is      78–9 practiser . . . warrant practitioner of
   supposed to make him repugnant to                forbidden and illegal arts
   Desdemona.                                    82 inclining party, faction
72 Judge . . . world may the world judge         83 cue Q’s Qu is identiﬁed by Honigmann
   me                                               (Texts, p. 160) among its characteristic-
   gross in sense obvious to any                    ally Shakespearian spellings.
   observer                                      86 course of direct session due process of
73 practised on plotted against                     an immediate court sitting
74 minerals medicines or poisons                 90 present immediate, urgent

                                             214
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                        1.3

brabantio               How? The Duke in council?
  In this time of the night? Bring him away!
  Mine’s not an idle cause: the Duke himself,                                                      95
  Or any of my brothers of the state,
  Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own;
  For if such actions may have passage free,
  Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.                                  Exeunt

1.3        Enter Duke and Senators, seated at a table, with lights,
           Ofﬁcers, and attendants
duke
  There is no composition in these news
  That gives them credit.
ﬁrst senator              Indeed, they are disproportioned:
  My letters say, a hundred and seven galleys.
duke
  And mine a hundred forty.
second senator                And mine two hundred.
  But though they jump not on a just account—                                                        5
  As, in these cases where the aim reports,
  ’Tis oft with difference—yet do they all conﬁrm
  A Turkish ﬂeet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

1.3] f (Scæna Tertia); not in q 0.1–2 Enter . . . attendants] after q (set at a Table with lights and);
Enter Duke, Senators, and Ofﬁcers. f 1 There is] q; There’s f these] q; this f 4 forty] f;
and forty q 6 the aim] f; they aym’d q1; they ayme q2


95  idle cause trivial case                                seated around a table, placed either in
96  brothers . . . state fellow potentates                 a ‘discovery space’ in the tiring-house
98  have . . . free be freely allowed                      façade, or perhaps in the same curtained
99  Bondslaves and pagans i.e. men who                     booth that may have been used for
    are both slaves and heathen. On Othello’s              the ‘bulk’ in 5.1 and the bed in 5.2
    past enslavement, see 1.3.138. Although                (see 5.1.1 and 5.2.0.1); but since ‘sit’
    the Atlantic slave-trade was well estab-               and ‘set’ are often alternative spellings
    lished by the early 17th century, slavery              of the same word, it could be equally
    at this time was by no means conﬁned to                that they are meant to enter and seat
    African, or even to pagan peoples (see                 themselves.
    above, pp. 124–5). Othello, moreover,              1   composition consistency, congruity (the
    often speaks as though he were a Christ-               only example of this usage in OED)
    ian. Nevertheless underlying Brabantio’s           2   credit credibility
    contemptuous phrase seems to be the                    disproportioned numerically incon-
    assumption of a ‘natural’ connection                   sistent
    between colour, paganism, and en-                  5   jump precisely agree, tally
    slavement.                                             just account exact estimate
1.3.0.1 seated The Q direction is ambiguous:           6   aim conjecture (cf. Hamlet, 4.5.9: ‘They
    the Duke and senators may be discovered                aim at it’)

                                                215
1.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

duke
  Nay, it is possible enough to judgement:
  I do not so secure me in the error,                                                       10
  But the main article I do approve
  In fearful sense.
sailor (within) What ho, what ho, what ho!
       Enter Sailor
ofﬁcer
  A messenger from the galleys.
duke                              Now, the business?
sailor
  The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes—
  So was I bid report here to the state                                                     15
  By Signor Angelo.
duke How say you by this change?
ﬁrst senator This cannot be,
  By no assay of reason. ’Tis a pageant
  To keep us in false gaze: when we consider                                               20
  Th’importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
  And let ourselves again but understand
  That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
  So may he with more facile question bear it,
  For that it stands not in such warlike brace,                                             25

10 in] f; to q 11 article] f, q2; Articles q1 12 sailor] f; One q 12.1 Enter Sailor] f;
Enter a Messenger. q (after ‘sense’, l. 12) 13 ofﬁcer] f, q2; Sailor q1 galleys] f, q2; Galley
q1 Now,] q; ~? What’s, f 16 By . . . Angelo] f, q2; not in q1 25–31 For . . . proﬁtless] f,
q2; not in q1

 9 to judgement in the light of careful             nor of Cyprus, as Honigmann suggests).
   consideration                                    The name seemingly derives from that
10–12 I . . . sense the confusion about the         of the naval captain Angelus Sorianus
   details does not make me so over-                (Angelo Soriano) who in Knolles carries
   conﬁdent that I fail to recognize the fear-      the Turkish ultimatum regarding Cyprus
   ful implications in the main thrust of this      to the Venetians (Bullough, p. 213).
   news                                          17 How . . . change A metrically amphibi-
13 Now F’s ‘Now? What’ creates an extra-            ous line.
   metrical syllable; but since ‘now’ and           How . . . by what is your opinion of
   ‘what’ are more or less interchangeable in    19 assay weighing up, test; endeavour
   a question of this kind, it may be that          pageant mere show
   ‘what’, which chimes rather awkwardly         20 in false gaze looking in the wrong
   with the sailor’s repeated ‘what ho’, was        direction
   meant to be cancelled in the manuscript       24 more . . . it capture it with an easier
   from which F derives.                            struggle
14 preparation a force or ﬂeet ﬁtted out for     25–31 For . . . proﬁtless Another almost
   attack or defence (OED n. 3a)                    certain cut from Q: not only is it difﬁcult
16 Angelo Presumably the commander of               to see why any reviser would feel the need
   the Venetian ﬂeet (rather than the Gover-        to pad out the Senator’s part by adding

                                             216
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.3

  But altogether lacks th’abilities
  That Rhodes is dressed in. If we make thought of this,
  We must not think the Turk is so unskilful
  To leave that latest which concerns him ﬁrst,
  Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain                                                    30
  To wake and wage a danger proﬁtless.
duke
  Nay, in all conﬁdence he’s not for Rhodes.
ofﬁcer Here is more news.
       Enter a Messenger
messenger
  The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
  Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,                                        35
  Have there injointed with an after ﬂeet.
ﬁrst senator
  Ay, so I thought: how many, as you guess?
messenger
  Of thirty sail; and now they do re-stem
  Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
  Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signor Montano,                                             40
  Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
32 Nay] f, q2; And q1 33.1 Messenger] f; 2. Messenger q 36 injointed] q1; inioynted
them f, q2; injoin’d rowe 37 ﬁrst . . . guess?] f (1 Sen.), q2; not in q1 38 re-stem] f;
resterine q1; resterne q2 40 toward] f; towards q

   such strictly unnecessary information,         34 Ottomites Ottoman Turks (earliest cita-
   but the removal of these lines damages            tion in OED)
   the logic of the speech by removing the           reverend and gracious Addressed to
   explanation for Cyprus’s vulnerability.           the Duke (or perhaps to the senators
25 For that because                                  generally).
   brace state of defence (OED n.2 1c, citing     36 injointed linked up. Since this is the only
   only this example); presumably adapted            use of injoint recorded in OED, and since
   from brace = armour (esp. for the arms), or       F’s ‘them’ is extra-metrical (though
   from brace, v.1 5, = summon up resolution         a judicious slurring of the line might
   for a task, brace oneself.                        accommodate it), Rowe may have been
                                                     right to suppose that Shakespeare origi-
26   abilities power, capacity                       nally wrote ‘injoined them’: a common
27   dressed in equipped with                        form of the verb enjoin (= join together),
31   wage contend with                               which was frequently reﬂexive.
32   Nay Q’s ‘And’ is exactly the kind of         36 after following
     small alteration we should expect if the     38–9 re-stem . . . course turn their course
     previous lines had been cut, making             back again, once again turn their prows
     the Duke’s dismissive ‘Nay’ no longer           on course (for)
     appropriate: but the effect is to turn the   39–40 bearing . . . purposes steering with
     Duke into a somewhat improbable secon-          apparently quite open intentions
     der of the Senator; so we can be fairly
     conﬁdent that the lines are not an addi-
     tion in F.

                                              217
1.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  With his free duty, recommends you thus
  And prays you to believe him.
duke
  ’Tis certain then for Cyprus.
  Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?                                                     45
ﬁrst senator He’s now in Florence.
duke
  Write from us to him—post-post-haste, dispatch.
ﬁrst senator
  Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
        Enter Brabantio, Othello, Cassio, Iago, Roderigo and
        Ofﬁcers
duke
  Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
  Against the general enemy Ottoman.                                                      50
  (To Brabantio) I did not see you: welcome, gentle
        signor—
  We lacked your counsel, and your help tonight.
brabantio
  So did I yours. Good your grace pardon me:
43 believe] f, q (beleeue); relieve johnson (conj. T. Clark) 45 he] f, q2; here q1 47 us to
him—post] f (vs, | To him, Post), q2; vs, wish him post q1 48.1 Cassio, Iago, Roderigo] f;
Roderigo, Iago, Cassio, Desdemona q; Iago, Roderigo capell 52 lacked] f (lack’t), q2; lacke
q1

42 free duty unstinting service                 48.1–2 Enter . . . Ofﬁcers Q’s inclusion of
   recommends you informs you (OED v.1             Desdemona may be a survival from an
   1e, citing only this example); but perhaps      earlier plan for the scene in which Desde-
   it means only ‘commends himself to you’.        mona was present from the beginning.
43 believe Clark’s conjectural emendation          Capell and a number of later editors
   ‘relieve’ has won some favour on the            assume that the same is true of Cassio,
   grounds that, as the subsequent dialogue        who is given nothing to say in this scene;
   suggests, it is not Montano’s credibility       but since he was sent to fetch Othello to
   that is at stake but his urgent need for        the Duke (1.2.36–8) his presence here
   reinforcement; and both Walker and              seems natural. Q’s suggestion that Iago
   Honigmann treat it as one of the ‘com-          should enter before the newly promoted
   mon errors’ that suggest ‘contamination’        Cassio may be worth preserving (cf.
   of F by Q (see below, Appendix B pp. 413,       1.1.0.1).
   416, 422–3). But the Duke and Senators       49 Othello In this respectful address by the
   are sifting the reliability of different        Duke, the hero (hitherto referred to only
   reports and conjectures concerning              as ‘the Moor’) is called by name for the
   Turkish intentions, and Montano’s               ﬁrst time.
   despatch conﬂicts with Angelo’s.                straight immediately
45 Marcus Luccicos Presumably intended          50 general i.e. the enemy of all
   as a Greek name, though (following              Christendom
   Capell’s ‘Lucchese’) a number of attempts    51 gentle i.e. of gentle birth
   have been made to substitute a more
   Italianate version.

                                            218
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.3

  Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
  Hath raised me from my bed; nor doth the general care                                      55
  Take hold on me. For my particular grief
  Is of so ﬂood-gate and o’er-bearing nature
  That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
  And it is still itself.
duke                      Why? What’s the matter?
brabantio
  My daughter; O, my daughter!
senators                            Dead?
brabantio                                 Ay, to me:                                        60
  She is abused, stolen from me, and corrupted
  By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks.
  For nature so preposterously to err—
  Being not deﬁcient, blind, or lame of sense—
  Sans witchcraft could not.                                                                 65
duke
  Whoe’er he be that in this foul proceeding
  Hath thus beguiled your daughter of her self,
  And you of her, the bloody book of law
  You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
  After your own sense—yea, though our proper son                                            70

54   nor] q; hor f 56 hold on] f; any hold of q1; hold of q2 grief] f (griefe), q2; griefes q1
59   Why?] f; ~, q 60 senators] f (Sen.); All. q; honigmann reads 1 SENATOR
64   Being . . . sense] f, q2; not in q1 65 Sans] f, q1 (corr.) (Saunce), q2; Since q1 (uncorr.)
70   your] f; its q yea] f, q2; not in q1


54 place ofﬁcial position (as a senator)             literal sense of the word is arsy-versy:
55 general care concern for the public               on the preposterous in Othello, see Parker,
   interest                                          Margins, pp. 48–52.
56 particular personal                               err Desdemona’s supposed errancy links
57 ﬂood-gate torrential (i.e. like the water         her with the ‘extravagant’ and ‘erring’
   suddenly released from sluice-gates)              Othello (1.1.135, 1.3.348).
58 engluts devours                                65 Sans without
61 abused Cf 1.1.172.                                could not (‘be’ is understood)
   corrupted The word had a much more             67 beguiled cheated, stolen by fraud
   strongly physical sense, suggesting that       68 bloody . . . law i.e. that part of the law
   Desdemona’s body is literally tainted, poi-       which prescribed capital punishment for
   soned, or putreﬁed by the Moor’s ‘spells          witchcraft
   and medicines’.                                69–70 You . . . sense you shall pass sen-
62 mountebanks charlatans. As Jonson’s               tence according to the harshest letter of
   Volpone (2.2) suggests, Italy (especially         the law as you yourself interpret it. F’s
   Venice) was seen as being the particular          Duke offers Brabantio much more arbi-
   home of such quackery.                            trary licence than Q’s.
63 preposterously monstrously, perver-            70 our proper son my very own son (the
   sely, contrary to the order of nature. The        Duke employs the royal ‘we’)

                                              219
1.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Stood in your action.
brabantio                 Humbly I thank your grace.
  Here is the man: this Moor, whom now it seems
  Your special mandate for the state affairs
  Hath hither brought.
all                       We are very sorry for’t.
duke (to Othello)
  What, in your own part, can you say to this?                                                  75
brabantio
  Nothing, but this is so.
othello
  Most potent, grave, and reverend signors,
  My very noble and approved good masters;
  That I have ta’en away this old man’s daughter,
  It is most true; true I have married her—                                                     80
  The very head and front of my offending
  Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
  And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace;
  For, since these arms of mine had seven years’ pith,
  Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used                                               85
  Their dearest action in the tented ﬁeld:
  And little of this great world can I speak
82 extent, no] q2; extent; no f; extent no q1     83 soft] f; set q

71 Stood . . . action were the object of your        selves syntactically elegant and larded
   legal suit                                        with choice terms: portance (l. 139), antres
75 in . . . part on your own behalf                  (l. 140), incline (l. 146), discourse (l. 150),
78 approved proved; esteemed                         dilate (l. 153), and distressful (l. 157),
   masters Othello’s deferential language            which OED describes as ‘literary and
   picks up the emphasis on servants and             chieﬂy poetical’.
   masters in 1.1.                                83 soft pleasing, relaxed, melodious;
81 head and front summit, highest extent             ingratiating; effeminate. Q’s ‘set’ (= con-
   (OED, head, n. 42, citing this as the earli-      ventional) is, however, a genuine (if less
   est example of the phrase). There is sub-         complex) alternative, since ‘soft’ might
   dued word-play on front = ‘forehead’ and          have resulted from a misreading of manu-
   probably on front = ‘affront’, or ‘effron-        script ‘sett’.
   tery’ (though OED does not record the          84 since . . . pith i.e. since I was seven
   latter sense before 1653).                        years old (‘pith’ = strength)
82 Rude rough, unreﬁned. The self-                85 Till . . . wasted until nine months
   deprecation may indicate something of             ago
   Othello’s sense of himself both as a ‘bar-     85–6 used . . . action whose most glorious
   barian’ outsider (see l. 349) and as a sol-       deeds have been conﬁned to the world of
   dier untrained in the civilian arts; but in       military encampments and battleﬁelds
   the context of his characteristically elo-        (with a quibble on the erotic sense of
   quent (and even slightly orotund) public          ‘dearest’)
   manner it is clearly hyperbolical. In fact     86 tented covered with tents (OED a. 1a;
   Othello’s ensuing speeches are them-              earliest citation)

                                              220
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.3

  More than pertains to feats of broil and battle;
  And therefore little shall I grace my cause
  In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,                                  90
  I will a round, unvarnished tale deliver
  Of my whole course of love: what drugs, what charms,
  What conjuration, and what mighty magic—
  For such proceeding I am charged withal—
  I won his daughter.
brabantio                A maiden never bold,                                               95
  Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
  Blushed at herself, and she—in spite of nature,
  Of years, of country, credit, everything—
  To fall in love with what she feared to look on?
  It is a judgement maimed and most imperfect                                             100
  That will confess perfection so could err
  Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
  To ﬁnd out practices of cunning hell
  Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
  That with some mixtures powerful o’er the blood,                                        105
  Or with some dram conjured to this effect,
  He wrought upon her.
88 feats of broil] capell; Feats of Broiles f, q2; feate of broyle q1 91 unvarnished] q; vn-
varnish’d u f 94 proceeding] f; proceedings q I am] f; am I q 95–6 bold . . . so] q2;
bold: | Of spirit so f; bold of spirit, | So q1 99 on?] q; ~; f 100 maimed] q (maimd);
main’d f imperfectŸ] q (~,); imperfect. f 101 could] f; would q 107 wrought upon] q;
~ vp on f

91 round blunt, plain                               yoking of an elderly man to a young wife
   unvarnished plain, unadorned (earliest           was a stock ingredient of comic plotting;
   citation in OED)                                 and part of the shock-effect of this
92–5 what . . . daughter        The     syntax      ‘domestic’ drama depends on the way
   appears to require ‘with what’, but as Fur-      in which it turns traditionally comic
   ness notes (p. 51) the omission of the           material to tragic ends (see Introduction,
   preposition in such adverbial construc-          pp. 4–6).
   tions is not uncommon in Shakespearian           credit reputation
   English.                                      100 maimed F’s ‘main’d’ represents variant
96 motion emotion, desire. The play on ‘still’      spellings (mained, mayned) still common
   (= motionless) is enabled by the fact that       in Shakespeare’s time.
   early modern physiology described the         101 err Cf. l. 63.
   activity of the emotions in kinetic terms.    103 practices evil trickery, machinations,
97, 102 nature Brabantio’s reiteration of           plots
   this term emphasizes what he (like Iago)      105 blood sexual desire
   sees as the monstrous unnaturalness of        106 dram small medicinal draught
   miscegenation (see 1.1.88–9).                    conjured . . . effect produced for this
98 years The disparity in years between             purpose (with a hint of magic). Conjured is
   Othello and Desdemona is often seen (not         accented on the second syllable.
   least by Othello himself; cf. 3.3.268–9) as   107 wrought upon her worked up her
   another ground of incompatibility. The           feelings

                                             221
1.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

duke                      To vouch this is no proof
  Without more wider and more overt test
  Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
  Of modern seeming do prefer against him.                                                    110
ﬁrst senator
  But, Othello, speak:
  Did you by indirect and forcèd courses
  Subdue and poison this young maid’s affections?
  Or came it by request and such fair question
  As soul to soul affordeth?
othello                      I do beseech you,                                                115
  Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
  And let her speak of me before her father:
  If you do ﬁnd me foul in her report,
  The trust, the ofﬁce I do hold of you
  Not only take away, but let your sentence                                                   120
  Even fall upon my life.
duke                      Fetch Desdemona hither.
                                Exeunt two or three attendants
othello
  Ensign, conduct them—you best know the place.
                                         jExit Iago after themk
  And till she come, as truly as to heaven
  I do confess the vices of my blood,
  So justly to your grave ears I’ll present                                                   125
duke] q; not in f vouch] f, q2; youth q1 108 wider] f; certaine q overt] q (ouert); ouer
f 109 Than these] f (Then these); These are q 110 seeming do] f; seemings, you q 111
ﬁrst senator] q (1 Sena.); Sen. f 116 Sagittary] f (Sagitary), q2; Sagittar q1 119 The
trust . . . you] f, q2; not in q1 121.1 Exeunt . . . attendants] q (Exit two or three.); not in f
122.1 Exit . . . them] rowe (subs.); not in f, q 123 till] q; tell f truly] f, q2; faithfull q1
124 I . . . blood] f, q2; not in q1
107 vouch . . . proof Cf. Dent S1019, ‘Sus-          souls will allow one another (OED, fair, a.
   picion (accusation) is no proof’.                 9–10; question, n. 2a). However, in this
                                                     play the term ‘fair’ (like ‘foul’) is probably
108 wider more ample or extensive, fuller            never without a racial loading (whether
   overt apparent, manifest; from which              or not the speaker is assumed to be con-
   criminal intent can be inferred (OED a. 2)        scious of it); see 1.2.66, and cf. l. 126
   test evidence (OED n.3 2)                         below.
109 thin habits insubstantial appearances         118 foul wicked, guilty; and see above, ll.
109–10 poor . . . seeming feeble conjec-             114–15 and 1.2.62.
   tures based on observation of superﬁcial       124 blood ﬂeshly nature; sexual desire. In
   commonplaces                                      this context, however, the term is also
112 indirect . . . courses crooked and               likely to carry the suggestion of ‘race’ (i.e.
   forcible means                                    ‘the vices peculiar to my nature as a
114–15 such . . . affordeth such candid              Moor’).
   and unblemished conversation as two            125 justly faithfully

                                             222
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    1.3

  How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love,
  And she in mine.
duke                Say it, Othello.
othello
  Her father loved me, oft invited me,
  Still questioned me the story of my life
  From year to year: the battles, sieges, fortunes                                          130
  That I have passed.
  I ran it through, even from my boyish days
  To th’ very moment that he bade me tell it—
  Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
  Of moving accidents by ﬂood and ﬁeld,                                                     135
  Of hair-breadth scapes i’th’ imminent deadly breach,
  Of being taken by the insolent foe
  And sold to slavery; of my redemption thence,
  And portance in my travailous history,
  Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,                                                  140
  Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch
        heaven,
130 battles] q; Battaile f fortunes] q; Fortune f 134 spoke] f; spake q 135 accidents
by] f, q2; accident of q1 138 slavery; of] f (slauery. Of), q2; slauery, and q1 139 por-
tance in my travailous] honigmann (conj. Proudfoot); portance in my Trauellours f; with it all
my trauells q1; portance in my trauells q2 140 antres] theobald; Antars f, q2; Antrees q1
141 and hills] q; Hills f heads] q; head f
   present A legal term, meaning ‘to lay            quibble on ‘travel’ and ‘travail’, is exactly
   before a court’ (OED v. 8).                      the kind of slightly pompous, recherché
                                                    phrase that Othello favours. Given the
129–45 story . . . shoulders         Othello’s      exotic nature of Othello’s tales, it may be
   account of his ‘travailous history’ seems        worth recalling the proverb ‘A traveller
   to draw on John Pory’s description of Leo        may lie with authority’ (Dent T476).
   Africanus in the epistle ‘To the Reader’      140 antres caverns (apparently Shake-
   which prefaces his translation of Leo’s          speare’s coinage from Latin antrum =
   Geographical Historie of Africa (1600). See      cave: OED). On caves as a conspicuous
   above, pp. 18–19.                                feature of Leo’s African landscape, see
129 Still continually                               Whitney, p. 479; Pory’s addendum detail-
135 by . . . ﬁeld by sea and land. But in           ing ‘places undescribed by John Leo’
   Othello’s case ‘ﬁeld’ will inevitably            includes a section on Africa Troglodytica,
   suggest ‘battleﬁeld’; so perhaps the             ‘in old times inhabited by the Troglodytae,
   phrase is really shorthand for ‘in sea and       a people so called because of their dwelling
   land battles’.                                   in caves under the ground’ (p. 10).
136 scapes escapes                                  vast From Latin vastus, whose meanings
   imminent . . . breach gap (in the wall           include ‘empty’ as well as ‘immense’.
   of a besieged town or castle) which may          idle useless (and therefore encouraging
   prove deadly at any moment                       the idleness attributed to the nomadic
139 portance bearing; conduct                       denizens of such places). The original
   travailous history Proudfoot’s sugges-           sense of the word was ‘empty’, which is
   tion that F ‘Trauellours’ resulted from a        probably also present here, as Honig-
   misreading of ‘Travellous’ seems plaus-          mann suggests, though OED offers no
   ible, since ‘travailous history’, with its       examples later than 1450.

                                             223
1.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

   It was my hint to speak—such was my process—
   And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
   The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
   Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear                                           145
   Would Desdemona seriously incline;
   But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
   Which ever as she could with haste dispatch
   She’d come again, and with a greedy ear
   Devour up my discourse; which I observing                                               150
   Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
   To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
   That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
   Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
   But not intentively. I did consent,                                                     155
   And often did beguile her of her tears
   When I did speak of some distressful stroke
   That my youth suffered. My story being done,
   She gave me for my pains a world of sighs:
142 hint] f, q2; hent q1      my process] f, q2; the ~ q1 143 other] q; others f 144
Anthropophagi] q (Anthropophagie); Antropophague f 145 Do grow] q; Grew f this] q1;
These things f; these q2 147 thence] q; hence f 148 Which] f, q2; And q1 154
parcels] f; parcell q 155 intentively] q; instinctiuely f 157 distressful] f, q2; distressed q1
159 sighs] q; kisses f

142 hint occasion, opportunity; implication         as a ‘pilgrimage’ because it brought him
   (OED n. 1a, 2a; earliest example of either       ﬁnally to Christian Venice (and to the
   use)                                             ‘divine’ Desdemona?).
   process story; drift of (my) narrative        154 by parcels piecemeal
143 Cannibals . . . eat The description is       155 intentively with full attention
   not redundant, since Cannibal (a variant      156 beguile her of charm her out of.
   of Carib, originally coined by Columbus)         Othello plays ironically with the same
   was still a proper name referring to             word (with its connotations of fraud and
   warlike (and supposedly cannibalistic)           magical deceit) that the angry Duke used
   Caribbean peoples. See App. F(ii) for notes      at l. 67.
   on the sources of Othello’s exotic ethno-     159 pains Equivocates between ‘my suffer-
   graphy in ll. 143–5.                             ings’ and ‘my trouble’ (in telling the
144 Anthropophagi (literally) man-eaters            story).
145 This to hear in order to hear this              sighs Not only does the Q reading seem
146 seriously earnestly, keenly                     appropriate to the delicacy of Desde-
   incline Probably suggests physical as            mona’s situation and the elliptical ‘hint’
   well as mental inclination; Desdemona            with which she conveys her feelings (l.
   would lean close to hear him.                    166), it neatly introduces the following
151 pliant hour opportune moment; but               four lines, which become ampliﬁcations of
   pliant may also be a transferred reference       her sighing protestations. Kisses, how-
   to Desdemona’s susceptible and yielding          ever, is scarcely a plausible misreading for
   disposition at that moment.                      sighs, and its presence in F is, in Ridley’s
153 my . . . dilate relate (or enlarge upon)        words, ‘almost as difﬁcult to account for
   the whole story of my journeying.                as it is to accept’. Whether the variants
   Othello’s life-journey is perhaps imagined       reﬂect systematic revision by Shakespeare

                                             224
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                     1.3

   She swore ‘in faith ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange,                                  160
   ’Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful!’
   She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
   That heaven had made her such a man; she thanked
        me,
   And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
   I should but teach him how to tell my story                                                165
   And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake.
   She loved me for the dangers I had passed,
   And I loved her that she did pity them.
   This only is the witchcraft I have used.
   Here comes the lady: let her witness it.                                                   170
        Enter Desdemona, Iago, and attendants

160 in faith] f; Ifaith q 166 hint] f; heate q     170.1 attendants] f; and the rest q; after ‘pity
them’ (l. 168) oxford; after ‘used’ honigmann


   or a change made (with or without his              meaning of ‘opportunity’ or ‘occasion’
   endorsement) in the theatre, there is no           here (as at l. 142), rather than ‘covert
   means of knowing. With the exception of            suggestion’ (OED n. 2, citing this as the
   Oxford (which suggests that ‘Desdemona             ﬁrst example), since Desdemona’s behav-
   may be thought of as impulsively affec-            iour (even if we read sighs rather than
   tionate’: TC, p. 479), almost all editions,        kisses at 159) seems to go well beyond
   regardless of the general preference for F         hinting. But the modern meaning was
   as a copy-text, print sighs. It was Pope who       certainly available by 1609 and (as Honig-
   ﬁrst questioned the propriety of F: ‘[t]he         mann recognizes) is difﬁcult to exclude,
   lady had been forward indeed, to give him          with the result that audiences easily
   a world of kisses upon the bare recital of         laugh at this line. Q’s heat has been uni-
   his story.’ However, as Furness points out,        versally rejected, even by editors like
   noting the openness with which Cassio              Ridley and Honigmann, who argue for Q
   kisses Emilia in 2.1, ‘kissing in Elizabeth’s      as a copy-text. If the Q1’s copy read ‘hent’
   time was not as signiﬁcant as it is now’.          (a variant spelling of ‘hint’) as it presum-
   Moreover, because of their prominence              ably did at l. 142, then ‘heat’ would of
   amongst the expressive conventions of              course be an easy misreading. But the
   Petrarchan love-poetry, sighs could some-          misreading could be in either direction,
   times be as erotically charged as kisses.          and the Q reading is defensible as a genu-
   Olivier, evidently thinking even ‘a world of       ine alternative: Upon this heat = ‘at this
   sighs’ suggestive enough, delivered ‘upon          [display of] ardour or feeling’. In the con-
   this hint’ with an ironic chuckle.                 text of Q’s ‘sighs’ it may be worth noting
                                                      that lovers’ sighs were conventionally hot
160 passing extremely                                 (Twelfth Night, 1.5.245; Romeo, 1.1.196;
163 That . . . man Usually glossed ‘that she          Cymbeline, 1.6.67–8, etc.).
   had been born a man like that’; but the         169 This . . . used Probably echoing, as
   alternative sense (‘that heaven had des-           E. H. W. Meyerstein suggested, the
   tined such a man for her’) seems more              response of a former bondslave in Pliny,
   likely in view of her subsequent lines.            who, when accused of acquiring wealth
   Again editors are offended by what they            by corrupt means, pointed to his agricul-
   see as the inappropriate forwardness sug-          tural implements and declared ‘these are
   gested by the more obvious sense.                  the sorceries, charms, and all the
166 hint Muir is almost certainly right to            enchantments that I use’ (letter in TLS,
   insist that ‘hint’ must have its original          1940, p. 72; cited in Bullough, p. 211).

                                               225
1.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

duke
  I think this tale would win my daughter too—
  Good Brabantio, take up this mangled matter at the best:
  Men do their broken weapons rather use,
  Than their bare hands.
brabantio                  I pray you hear her speak!
  If she confess that she was half the wooer,                                           175
  Destruction on my head if my bad blame
  Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress,
  Do you perceive in all this noble company
  Where most you owe obedience?
desdemona                            My noble father,
  I do perceive here a divided duty.                                                    180
  To you I am bound for life and education;
  My life and education both do learn me
  How to respect you: you are the lord of duty,
  I am hitherto your daughter. But here’s my husband;
  And so much duty as my mother showed                                                  185
  To you, preferring you before her father,
  So much I challenge that I may profess
  Due to the Moor my lord.
brabantio                     Goodbye, I’ve done!
  Please it your grace, on to the state affairs.
  I had rather to adopt a child than get it.                                            190

176 on my head] f; lite on me q 183 the lord of] f, q2; Lord of all my q1 188 Goodbye]
This edition after q (God bu’y); God be with you f I’ve] after q (I ha); I haue f

172 take . . . best Cf. Dent B326, ‘Make the      you’, 3.3.377) is simply a contracted form
   best of a bad bargain’.                        of F’s ‘God be with you’, the style of dis-
177 gentle mistress From a father to a            missal or farewell which by the early 18th
   daughter this honoriﬁc will sound              century came to be rendered ‘Goodbye’. It
   sardonic.                                      appears elsewhere in Shakespeare as ‘God
180–8 duty . . . bound . . . lord     Desde-      be wy you’ (LLL, 3.1.146), ‘God b’uy’ (1
   mona, as beﬁts a child of the patriarchal      Henry VI, 3.5.32), ‘God buy’ye’ (Hamlet,
   family, conceives of her relationship to       2.2.551), the degree of contraction being
   both father and husband in the language        largely determined by metrical consid-
   of service and deference to a master or        erations. Here it will have been phoneti-
   ‘lord’.                                        cally almost indistinguishable from the
181 education upbringing                          modern form; however, it is possible
182 learn teach (survives in expressions          (given the play’s preoccupation with
   such as ‘that’ll learn you’)                   damnation and redemption) that the
186 preferring . . . before elevating you         meaning may be coloured by the false ety-
   above                                          mology implicit in the Q contraction
187 challenge lay claim to, demand as a           (‘God buy you’ = God redeem you).
   right                                       189 Please it if it pleases
188 Goodbye Q’s ‘God bu’y’ (like ‘God by       190 get beget

                                           226
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   1.3

  Come hither, Moor:
  I here do give thee that with all my heart
  Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
  I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel,
  I am glad at soul I have no other child;                                                 195
  For thy escape would teach me tyranny
  To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.
duke
  Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence,
  Which as a grece or step may help these lovers
  Into your favour.                                                                        200
  When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
  By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
  To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
  Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
  What cannot be preserved when Fortune takes,                                             205
  Patience her injury a mockery makes.
  The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief;
  He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
brabantio
  So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile—
  We lose it not so long as we can smile:                                                  210

193 Which . . . heart] f, q2; not in q1 197 them] f; em q 200 Into . . . favour] q; not in f
204 new] f; more q 205 preserved] q (preseru’d); presern’d f

193 Which . . . heart Probably omitted              there is no remedy it is folly to chide’;
   from Q as a result of compositorial eye-         C921, ‘Past cure, past care’; C922, ‘What
   skip, since both 192 and 193 end in              cannot be cured must be endured’.
   ‘heart’.                                      202 By . . . depended by our actually expe-
   but . . . hast if you did not already pos-       riencing the worst eventualities, which
   sess it                                          were hitherto dependent on the outcome
194 For your sake thanks to you                     of our hopes
197 hang clogs shackle them to heavy             203 mischief misfortune
   logs of wood to prevent their escape          204 next most immediate
   (as practised with slaves as well as          205–6 What . . . makes when chance robs
   animals)                                         us of what we cannot in any case hope to
198 sentence maxim, aphorism                        keep, the exercise of patience will enable
199 grece stairway, step. This more usual           us to make light of the blows. The Duke’s
   form of the archaic noun better repre-           ﬁgure imagines a familiar allegorical con-
   sents its pronunciation than F grise (cf. Q      test between Patience and Fortune.
   greese).                                      208 spends wastes
200 Into . . . favour Q’s half-line marks a         bootless pointless, beyond remedy
   convenient pause before the Duke launch-      210 lose The F spelling ‘loose’ suggests a
   es into the formal advice whose senten-          bawdy quibble from animal husbandry no
   tious apothegms are pointed up by the use        longer available in modern English (loose
   of rhyming couplets.                             = release the female to the male; cf. ‘loose
201 When . . . ended Cf. Dent R71, ‘Where           her to an African’, Tempest, 2.1.131).

                                             227
1.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  He bears the sentence well that nothing bears
  But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
  But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
  That, to pay Grief, must of poor Patience borrow.
  These sentences, to sugar or to gall,                                                   215
  Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.
  But words are words: I never yet did hear
  That the bruised heart was piercèd through the ear.
  I humbly beseech you proceed to th’affairs of state.
duke The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for                                    220
  Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known
  to you; and though we have there a substitute of most
  allowed sufﬁciency, yet opinion, a more sovereign mis-
  tress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you. You
  must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your                                  225
  new fortunes with this more stubborn and boisterous
  expedition.

218 piercèd] q (pierced); pierc’d f; pieced theobald (after warburton) ear] q; eares f 219
I . . . state] f; Beseech you now, to the affaires of the state q 220 a most] f; most q 223
more sovereign] f; soueraigne q



211–12 He . . . hears anyone can respond           here. But in F Brabantio seems to initiate
   well to such maxims who doesn’t have to         the switch to prose continued in the
   put up with anything more than the              Duke’s speech. As Honigmann notes, the
   cheap consolation which is all he can           abrupt switch from stylized couplets to
   derive from them (with quibbles on sen-         prose, as the discussion turns from philo-
   tence = moral maxim; judicial punish-           sophic generalizations to the hard reality
   ment; and free = generous, lavish;              of public affairs, is a deliberate stylistic
   without cost).                                  effect; though whether it makes Othello’s
214 That . . . borrow that to deal with his        return to verse rhythms (ll. 228 ff.) ‘sound
   grief must seek support from no richer          self-indulgent’ is open to question.
   resource than patience. Brabantio plays      220 preparation Cf. l. 15.
   sardonically with the Duke’s allegory (ll.   221 fortitude of the place strength of the
   205–6).                                         citadel (OED, place, n. 5c)
215 gall bile; poison; bitterness               222 substitute deputy; i.e. the Governor,
216 equivocal equally appropriate                  (presumably) Montano
217 words are words Dent W832 (and cf.          223 allowed sufﬁciency approved or recog-
   W833, W840.1).                                  nized competency
218 bruised crushed, mangled, smashed              opinion public opinion
   piercèd penetrated, touched, affected;       223–4 a more . . . effects a more powerful
   lanced, and so cured (Sanders). Some edi-       determinant of what happens
   tors prefer Theobald’s ‘pieced’ = mended,    224 more safer Cf. 1.1.96.
   restored. Brabantio’s ﬁgure ironically       225 slubber soil; darken
   anticipates Iago’s strategy of poison        226 stubborn and boisterous ﬁerce and
   through the ear (see e.g. 2.3.341).             rough
219 I . . . state Q (allowing for the normal    227 expedition The context suggests ‘haste’
   elision, ‘th’affairs’) preserves the metre      or ‘speed’ as well as ‘military enterprise’.

                                            228
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    1.3

othello
  The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
  Hath made the ﬂinty and steel couch of war
  My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize                                                  230
  A natural and prompt alacrity
  I ﬁnd in hardness, and do undertake
  This present wars against the Ottomites.
  Most humbly therefore bending to your state,
  I crave ﬁt disposition for my wife,                                                        235
  Due reference of place and exhibition,
  With such accommodation and besort
  As levels with her breeding.
duke
  Why, at her father’s!
brabantio                I’ll not have it so.
othello
  Nor I.
desdemona Nor would I there reside                                                           240
  To put my father in impatient thoughts

228 grave] f (graue), q2; great q1 229 couch] q (Cooch); Coach f 231 alacrity] q;
Alacartie f 232 do] f, q2; would q1 233 This . . . wars] f (This . . . Warres), q1;
This . . . warre q2; These . . . wars malone 236 reference] f, q2; reuerence q1 237 With
such accommodation] f, q2; Which ~ Accomodation? q1 239 Why . . . father’s] f (Why at
her Fathers?); If you please, bee’t at her fathers q I’ll] q (Ile); I will f 240 Nor would I] f;
Nor I, I would not q


229 ﬂinty and steel couch ‘The allusion is        236 exhibition maintenance, support
   to sleeping on the ground in armour’           237 accommodation lodgings (OED 7; ear-
   (Sanders).                                        liest recorded use here or Measure, 3.1.14)
230 thrice-driven i.e. the very softest              besort suitable retinue. The word seems
   down, from which the heaviest feathers            to be a Shakespearian coinage and exists
   have been separated by three winnow-              elsewhere only in Lear, where it is a verb:
   ings.                                             ‘such men as may besort your age’ (Trag.
   agnize acknowledge, confess                       Lear, 1.4.229).
231–2 A . . . hardness that I ﬁnd myself          238 As . . . breeding as beﬁts her station
   naturally eager to undertake hardship          239–40 Why . . . reside The Q version of
233 This . . . wars For the use of wars as a         this passage is metrically complete, which
   singular collective noun, see OED, war,           suggests the possibility of corruption in F.
   n.1 1c; cf. Troilus, 5.3.51, and All’s Well,      On the other hand, the incomplete lines
   2.3.288.                                          could be used to signal tense pauses after
234 bending . . . state deferring to your            breeding and Nor I.
   authority. But since bend can also mean        240 Nor . . . reside In Q Desdemona echoes
   ‘bow’ and state ‘throne’, Othello may bow         Othello’s deﬁant refusal of the Duke’s
   to the enthroned Duke as he speaks the            suggestion: ‘Nor I, I would not there
   words.                                            reside . . . ’; the F version seems to soften
235 ﬁt disposition suitable arrangements             the vehemence of her response.
236 Due . . . place proper respect for her
   rank (OED, reference, n. 3)

                                              229
1.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  By being in his eye. Most gracious Duke,
  To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear,
  And let me ﬁnd a charter in your voice
  T’assist my simpleness—
duke                          What would you, Desdemona?                                     245
desdemona
  That I did love the Moor to live with him,
  My downright violence and scorn of fortunes
  May trumpet to the world. My heart’s subdued
  Even to the very quality of my lord:
  I saw Othello’s visage in his mind,                                                        250
  And to his honours and his valiant parts
  Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate;
  So that, dear lords, if I be left behind
  A moth of peace, and he go to the war,

243 your prosperous] f; a gracious q 245 T’assist my simpleness—] q2 (simplenesse.—);
~ ~ simplenesse. f; And if my simplenesse.—-q1 you, Desdemona?] f, q2; you—-speake.
q1 246 did] q; not in f 247 scorn] q1 (scorne); storme f, q2 fortunes] f, q; fortune
keightley 249 very quality] f, q2; vtmost pleasure q1


243 unfolding disclosure, revelation                 ‘utmost pleasure’ is absent from F, a
   prosperous favourable                             difference consistent with its slightly
244 charter grant of privilege or pardon             softened and more passive presentation
245 simpleness innocence, naivety                    of Desdemona in Act 1. For a vigorous
247 violence vehemence of personal feeling           defence of the F reading’s ‘rich fusion of
   or action; extreme ardour or fervour              submission and self-assertion’, see Snow,
   (OED n. 5). Sanders suggests ‘violation of        pp. 407–8. The greater iambic regularity
   the norm’, and Honigmann ‘violent rup-            of the Q version suggests a possible actor’s
   ture with conventional behaviour’.                substitution (cf. App. B, pp. 430–1).
   scorn of fortunes disdain for any conse-       250 visage Often has the sense of ‘counte-
   quences. Many editors follow Q2 in pre-           nance’, i.e. the face as ‘expressive of feel-
   ferring F’s storm: the two words could            ing or temperament’ (OED n. 3); but it can
   easily be confused, since c and t were difﬁ-      also mean ‘assumed appearance . . . a
   cult to distinguish in Elizabethan hands          pretence or semblance’. Both senses are
   (cf. Troilus, 1.1.37, ‘sun doth light a           probably in play here: Desdemona implies
   scorn’, where Rowe’s emendation of QF             that the blackness of Othello’s face is
   ‘scorn’ to ‘storm’ has been widely accept-        merely a deceptive outward show, and
   ed); and ‘storm of fortune’ was a phrase          that his true countenance is to be dis-
   with almost proverbial currency, which            covered in his mind. Cavell suggests,
   the compositor might be encouraged to             however, that the line ‘more naturally
   recall by the juxtaposition with violence.        says . . . that she saw his visage as he sees
   But scorn makes better sense here, since,         it’ (p. 129).
   while Desdemona has clearly deﬁed For-         251 valiant parts military virtues
   tune, she can scarcely be said to have suf-    253–8 So . . . voice Closely based on Giraldi,
   fered its storms yet.                             where, however, it is the Moor who ﬁrst
248 subdued reduced to obedience,                    expresses his reluctance to part from Dis-
   brought into spiritual subjection (OED v.         demona (see App. C, p. 437).
   1e, 2a–b)                                      254 moth Usually glossed ‘an idle, useless
249 very quality true character, nature.             creature’; but ‘moth’ normally denotes
   The suggestion of sexual desire in Q’s            ‘clothes-moth’ and its connotations are

                                              230
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    1.3

  The rites for why I love him are bereft me,                                                 255
  And I a heavy interim shall support
  By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
othello
  Let her have your voice.
  Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
  To please the palate of my appetite,                                                        260
  Nor to comply with heat the young affects

255 rites] f, q; rights warburton why] f; which q 258–9 Let . . . heaven] f; Your voyces
Lords: beseech you let her will, | Haue a free way q1; Your voyces Lords: beseech you let her
will | Haue a free way: | Vouch with me heauen q2 260 my] f, q; me capell (conj. Upton)


    more destructive; cf. ‘moth to honour’          258 voice approval
    (Revenger’s Tragedy, 1.4.31).                   259 Vouch with me bear witness
                                                    259–63 I therefore . . . mind The general
255 rites Since ‘rites’ and ‘rights’ were              sense of what Othello is saying is clear
   interchangeable spellings as well as                enough: he is not asking that Desdemona
   homonyms, it is difﬁcult to be completely           be allowed to accompany him simply to
   certain which is meant here; and though             gratify his appetite or because he is driven
   Warburton’s emendation to ‘rights’ pro-             by his desires in a way that would be inap-
   voked Styan Thirlby to exclaim ‘Why,                propriate to a man of his age, but because
   thou goose’, an audience will probably              he responds generously to her mental
   hear both meanings. Rites picks up the              qualities. However, the detail of his
   sacramental suggestion of consecrate (l.            speech is harder to explicate, and editors
   252); but ‘rites of love’ is also a stock term      generally suspect corruption in ll. 261–2.
   for both sexual fulﬁlment and the affec-            Numerous attempts have been made to
   tionate indulgences of friendship (cf.              emend the passage, the debate running to
   Romeo, 3.2.8; 1 Henry VI, 1.3.92; Richard           nearly four pages in Furness: the most
   III, 5.5.54 [‘rights of love’, Oxford]; Much        widely accepted solution is Upton’s, sub-
   Ado, 2.1.335; All’s Well, 2.4.41). ‘Rights’         stituting ‘me’ for ‘my’ and assuming a
   in the sense of the ‘privileges (due to a           parenthetic construction: ‘nor to indulge
   wife)’ is arguably less probable in the             the heat of desire—my youthful passions
   mouth of a woman who boasts of her                  being now dead—and the allowable [or
   ‘downright violence’, though it is perhaps          “personal”] physical satisfactions (of
   better ﬁtted to F’s slightly more decorous          marriage)’; but this is syntactically awk-
   treatment of Desdemona’s character.                 ward, and a well-favoured alternative is to
256 heavy weary; full of grief                         treat ‘defunct’ as a misreading, usually
   support ‘endure (with a quibble on prop-            (as Theobald proposed) for ‘distinct’ (=
   ping up something heavy)’ (Honigmann).              individual). If, however, defunct is under-
257 dear absence (a) the absence of him                stood as a Latinism, no emendation is
   who is so dear to me; (b) his costly, griev-        necessary.
   ous absence                                      259 I . . . not I don’t beg it in order to
258–9 Let . . . heaven The omission of any          261 comply with Several alternatives are
   reference to Desdemona’s will (whose                possible: (a) ‘ﬁll with’ (OED, comply, v.1
   meanings include ‘sexual desire’) leaves            from Latin complere = ﬁll up); (b) ‘enfold
   only Othello’s appetite at issue; this is con-      in’ (OED, comply, v.2 from Latin complicare
   sistent with F’s generally more conser-             = enfold, embrace); (c) ‘urge on with’ (cf.
   vative treatment of her character. The              OED, apply, v. 17; ply, v.2 4b).
   metrically incomplete l. 258 suggests               heat erotic excitement, appetite
   some tampering with the text, which, in          261–2 young . . . satisfaction the youthful
   light of the slightly awkward repetition of         passions [expressed] in the natural
   Let from l. 257, may not be authorial (see          performance and satisfaction of marital
   App. B, pp. 431–2).                                 desires

                                                231
1.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

   In my defunct and proper satisfaction,
   But to be free and bounteous to her mind;
   And heaven defend your good souls that you think
   I will your serious and great business scant                                             265
   For she is with me—no, when light-winged toys
   Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness
   My speculative and ofﬁced instruments,
   That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
   Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,                                                270
   And all indign and base adversities
   Make head against my estimation!
duke
   Be it as you shall privately determine,
   Either for her stay or going: th’affair cries haste,
   And speed must answer it.
a senator                       You must away tonight.                                      275
desdemona
   Tonight, my lord?
    262 defunct] f, q; distinct theobald; disjunct malone 263 to her] f, q2; of her q1 265
great] f; good q 266 For] q; When f 267 Of] f; And q seel] f; foyles q 268 ofﬁced] f
(ofﬁc’d); actiue q instruments] q; Instrument f 272 estimation] f; reputation q 274
her] f, q2; not in q1 th’affair cries] f (th’Affaire), q2 (subs.); the affaires cry q1 275 answer
it.] f; answer, you must hence to night, q a senator . . . tonight] f (Sen.); not in q 276
desdemona . . . night] q; not in f
262 defunct Usually taken to mean ‘extinct,       270 skillet small cooking pot
   dead’; but more easily understood as a         271 indign unworthy; shameful
   Latinism based on the original meaning of      272 Make head against rise up against,
   defunctus (‘discharged, performed’).              attack
263 free generous                                    estimation Q’s reputation gets the sense.
264 defend forbid                                    Noting that ‘reputation’ is an important
266 For because                                      theme in the play, Rizvi argues that
266–7 light-winged . . . Cupid i.e. Cupid’s          Shakespeare, when revising the text for
   arrows (the frivolous business of love)           the theatre, substituted reputation ‘in
267 seel sew up (as the eyes of young hawks          order to strengthen the use of the key-
   were stitched during training)                    word’ (p. 340). However, the F reading
   wanton dullness drowsiness resulting              accords better with Othello’s somewhat
   from sexual indulgence                            inﬂated style, and Q would be an obvious
268 speculative . . . instruments         eyes       actor’s substitution.
   (‘organs whose special function it is to       274 cries demands
   see’). One of Othello’s characteristically     275 answer deal with (playing on ‘cries’)
   orotund locutions.                             276 Tonight . . . This night F’s omission of
269 That to the point at which                       Desdemona’s interjection and the Duke’s
   disports (erotic) diversions                      reply may simply be (as Oxford suggests)
   business ofﬁcial duties                           the result of eye-skip, but is again consis-
270 housewives        The      Q     spelling,       tent with a treatment of her character
   ‘huswiues’, is a reminder of the usual            that generally makes her appear more
   pronunciation, ‘hussif’, from which               restrained and passive than in the Q
   ‘hussy’ derives; the two terms often over-        version.
   lap in 17th-century usage. Cf. 2.1.112,
   4.1.90.

                                             232
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.3

duke                  This night.
othello                           With all my heart.
duke
   At nine i’th’ morning here we’ll meet again.
   Othello, leave some ofﬁcer behind
   And he shall our commission bring to you,
   With such things else of quality and respect                                           280
   As doth import you.
othello                 So please your grace, my ensign—
   A man he is of honesty and trust—
   To his conveyance I assign my wife,
   With what else needful your good grace shall think
   To be sent after me.
duke                   Let it be so.                                                      285
   Goodnight to everyone—and, noble signor,
   If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
   Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
a senator
   Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.
brabantio
   Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:                                           290
   She has deceived her father, and may thee.
                    Exeunt Duke, Brabantio, Senators, Ofﬁcers,
                                                and attendants
othello
   My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,

277 nine i’th’] f, q2; ten i’the q1 280 With] q; And f and] f, q2; or q1 281 import] f,
q2; concerne q1 So please] f; Please q 290 if . . . see] f, q2; haue a quicke eye to see q1
291 and may] f, q2; may doe q1 291.1–2 Exeunt . . . attendants] after q (Exeunt.); Exit. f;
after ‘faith’ (l. 292) sanders


280–1 such . . . you such other matters             but also ‘manly strength and courage’;
   whose nature and importance make them            the sense of ‘inherent quality’ (used e.g.
   of concern to you                                of medicines, herbs, etc.) is probably also
282 honesty The ﬁrst reference to Iago’s            present.
   ‘honesty’, the quality which characters in       delighted delightful
   the play repeatedly identify as the distin-   288 fair (a) fair-skinned; (b) beautiful; (c)
   guishing mark of his character. Contem-          free from moral blemish
   porary meanings of the word included             black (a) dark-skinned; (b) baneful,
   ‘honour’, ‘honourable character’, and            malignant, sinister; (c) foul, wicked
   ‘generosity’, as well the modern ‘upright-    292 Honest honourable; upright, straight-
   ness’, ‘integrity’, and ‘truthfulness’.          forward; but also ‘a vague epithet of
283 conveyance escorting                            appreciation or praise, esp. as used in a
287 virtue Not merely ‘moral excellence’,           patronizing way to an inferior’ (OED 1c).

                                             233
1.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  My Desdemona must I leave to thee:
  I prithee let thy wife attend on her,
  And bring them after in the best advantage.                                                295
  Come Desdemona, I have but an hour
  Of love, of worldly matter and direction
  To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
           Exeunt Othello and Desdemona, jattended by Cassiok
roderigo
  Iago.
iago What sayst thou, noble heart?
roderigo
  What will I do, think’st thou?
iago                               Why, go to bed and sleep.                                 300
roderigo
  I will incontinently drown myself.
iago If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why, thou
  silly gentleman?
roderigo It is silliness to live, when to live is torment; and
  then have we a prescription to die, when death is our                                      305
  physician.
iago O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four
  times seven years, and, since I could distinguish betwixt a
295 them] f; her q 297 worldly] q; wordly f matter] f; matters q 298 the] q; the the f
298.1 Exeunt . . . Cassio] This edition; Exit Moore and Desdemona. (after ‘Iago’, l. 299) q; Exit.
f 302 If] f; Well, if q after] f; after it q 302–3 Why . . . gentleman?] f (Why thou silly
Gentleman?); Why, thou silly Gentleman. q1; Why thou silly Gentleman. q2; Why, thou silly
gentleman! rowe 304 torment] f; a torment q 305 have we] f; we haue q 307 O vil-
lainous] f, q2; not in q1 have] f; ha q 308 betwixt] f; betweene q

295 in . . . advantage at the most conve-             metre, and a dramatic point can be made
   nient juncture                                     by Iago’s shifting to prose in his burst of
297 direction instructions                            sardonic irritation beginning at l. 302.
298 obey the time comply with present              297 thou Iago’s shift to the singular pro-
   necessity (Dent T340.2)                            noun marks a subtle alteration in his rela-
298.1 attended . . . Cassio       If    Cassio’s      tionship with Roderigo (cf. 1.1.2, 118).
   entry with Othello at 48.1 is not a ‘ghost’     301 incontinently immediately
   direction, then he should exit either           303 silly A number of meanings are prob-
   with the Duke (as Sanders, following               ably in play: (a) deserving of pity; (b)
   Capell, assumes) or with Othello and               weak, feeble; (c) ignorant, foolish, simple-
   Desdemona; as the Duke has said fare-              minded.
   well to Othello’s party, it seems more          304 silliness First example cited in OED.
   likely that Cassio would accompany his          305 prescription (a) ancient right; (b)
   commander.                                         doctor’s order
299–301 Iago . . . myself It is not clear          307 O villainous! what a shameful,
   from either F or Q whether these lines are         detestable idea
   meant to be in verse. Editors generally         307–8 I . . . years Iago is signiﬁcantly
   print them as prose, but if l. 300 is treated      younger than Othello; though, given
   as a hexameter, they conform to the                the much shorter life expectancy of

                                               234
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                1.3

  beneﬁt and an injury, I never found man that knew how
  to love himself. Ere I would say I would drown myself for                            310
  the love of a guinea-hen, I would change my humanity
  with a baboon.
roderigo What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be
  so fond; but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
iago Virtue? A ﬁg! ’Tis in ourselves that we are thus, or                              315
  thus. Our bodies are our gardens to the which our wills
  are gardeners; so that if we will plant nettles or sow
  lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one
  gender of herbs or distract it with many—either to have it
  sterile with idleness or manured with industry—why, the                              320
  power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills.
  If the beam of our lives had not one scale of reason to
  poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of
  our natures would conduct us to most preposterous
  conclusions; but we have reason to cool our raging                                   325

309 man] f; a man q    316 are our] f; are q   322 beam] theobald; braine f; ballance q


   Jacobeans, he is hardly in the prime of     316 bodies . . . gardens As Honigmann
   youth; hence his condescending attitude        notes, this is a theological commonplace,
   towards the ‘young quat’ Roderigo              appropriate to a speech that is construct-
   (5.1.11).                                      ed as a kind of mock-sermon. On Iago’s
                                                  fetishization of individual will as a
311 guinea-hen       (female) turkey or           characteristic of corrupt Italianate
   guinea-fowl; (in slang) a prostitute           inwardness, see Floyd-Wilson, pp. 143–4,
   (OED 2b, citing this as the earliest           151–2.
   example). In context, the connection        317–18 nettles . . . thyme These plants
   with Guinea (West Africa) seems                were complementary opposites, nettles
   signiﬁcant, especially when linked with        and hyssop being ‘dry’, and lettuce and
   ‘baboon’.                                      thyme ‘wet’; for this reason they were
312 baboon Sometimes used (like ape) as a         thought, when planted together, to aid
   synonym for fool or buffoon. Honigmann,        one another’s growth.
   citing Kinsmen, 3.5.134 (‘the babion with   318 set plant
   long tail and eke long tool’), notes that   319 gender kind
   baboons were thought to be especially          distract it with divide it between
   lecherous.                                  321 corrigible . . . this power to correct
314 fond foolish; besotted                        this
315 virtue power, strength of character        322 beam bar from which the two scales are
   ﬁg On the sexual signiﬁcance of ﬁgs see        suspended, or (by extension) the instru-
   Williams, Dictionary, pp. 480–1; Florio        ment itself. In the light of Q’s balance,
   glosses ﬁca (‘ﬁg’): ‘Also used for a           Theobald’s suggestion that F’s ‘braine’
   woman’s quaint, and women in Italy use         resulted from a misreading of ‘beame’ is
   it as an oath to swear by.’ The oath was       entirely plausible.
   usually accompanied by an obscene ges-         poise counterbalance
   ture (sometimes known as the ‘Spanish       323 blood passion
   ﬁg’) in which the thumb was thrust          324 preposterous See l. 63.
   between the ﬁngers of a clenched ﬁst, or    325 conclusions results
   into the mouth.

                                           235
1.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts—whereof
  I take this that you call ‘love’ to be a sect or scion.
roderigo It cannot be.
iago It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the
  will. Come, be a man! Drown thyself? Drown cats and                                       330
  blind puppies! I have professed me thy friend, and I
  confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable
  toughness. I could never better stead thee than now. Put
  money in thy purse; follow thou the wars; defeat thy
  favour with an usurped beard. I say, put money in thy                                     335
  purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue
  her love to the Moor—put money in thy purse—nor he
  his to her. It was a violent commencement in her, and
  thou shalt see an answerable sequestration—put but
  money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their                                   340

326 our unbitted] q; or vnbitted f 329 permission] f, q; perversion kellner conj.
331 have professed] f; professe q 333 than] f (then), q (then) 334 thou the] f; these q
336 It . . . continue] f; It cannot be, that Desdemona should long continue q 337 to] f; vnto
q 338 his] f, q2; not in q1 in her] f; not in q


326 motions emotions, impulses                        his amours is a standard theme of 17th-
   unbitted unbridled. The horse was a                century satire.
   stock emblem of desire.                         334–5 defeat . . . beard spoil your looks
327 sect or scion cutting (Latin sectum) or           with a false beard (or perhaps, by growing
   slip (for grafting)                                a beard which would suit a soldier, but
329–30 permission of the will Something               not a reﬁned young gentleman like
   licensed by either (a) the rational will of        yourself)
   which Iago has just been speaking (ll.          339 answerable sequestration corre-
   316–27) or (b) sexual desire. An unusual           spondingly violent separation. There may
   phrase whose unsatisfactoriness is per-            be a quibble on commencement = taking a
   haps indicated by Honigmann’s slightly             degree (in divinity) and sequestration =
   desperate conjecture: ‘perhaps allud-              excommunication.
   ing to God’s “permissive will”, which           340–1 These Moors . . . wills Iago’s use of
   tolerates the existence of evil (see Paradise      the demonstrative these implies that he
   Lost, 3.685)’. Given the easy misreading           possesses a comprehensive knowledge of
   of m for u/v, it is tempting to accede to          African mores; but, whilst his claims
   Kellner’s ‘perversion’.                            could be supported by reference to the
330 be a man This injunction, with its                writings of travellers such as Leo
   implicit challenge to the masculinity of           Africanus, the stereotype of the irrational
   Iago’s victim, illustrates what will emerge        and sexually insatiable black man was
   as one of his most characteristic tools of         by no means so well established in
   manipulation; see 3.3.376, 4.1.57, 61,             Shakespeare’s time as it would become
   73, 85; and cf. his drinking song, 2.3.65.         in the 19th century. Indeed, Galenic
332 knit . . . deserving committed to                 humoral theory maintained that the cool,
   achieving what you deserve                         dry constitution of southern peoples, and
   perdurable indestructible                          the predominance of black bile in their
333 stead help                                        temperament, inclined them to con-
333–4 Put . . . purse sell everything you             stancy; see, for example, Bodin, p. 124;
   can to raise cash. The story of the feckless       and cf. Floyd-Wilson, chap. 6. See also
   heir who mortgages his estates to pursue           below, 3.4.28–9, and App. F(iv).

                                               236
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 1.3

   wills: ﬁll thy purse with money. The food that to him now
   is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as acerb as
   coloquintida. She must change for youth: when she is
   sated with his body she will ﬁnd the errors of her choice.
   She must have change, she must. Therefore, put money                                   345
   in thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more
   delicate way than drowning: make all the money thou
   canst. If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring
   barbarian and a super-subtle Venetian be not too hard for
   my wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her—                               350
   therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself! It is
   clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be hanged in

342 acerb] q1; bitter f, q2 as] f, q2; as the q1 343 She . . . youth] f, q2; not in q1 344
errors] f; error q 345 She . . . must] q; not in f 349 a super-subtle] q (a super subtle);
super-subtle f 350 of ] f; a q 351 thyself] f; not in q It is] f; tis q


341 wills Iago again equivocates on the              of Revelation in the phrasing of the sen-
   meanings of ‘rational intention’ and              tence: see above) on the part of a scribe
   ‘sexual desire’.                                  or compositor who found the original
342 luscious as locusts Cf. the description          difﬁcult.
   of John the Baptist’s desert sojourn in        343 coloquintida colocynth, bitter apple.
   Matthew 3: 4: ‘his meat was also locusts          Native to the southern Mediterranean
   and wild honey’. Ridley cites Gerard’s            and Sinai regions and valued for its
   Herball (1597): ‘The carob groweth in             purgative properties (Gerard’s Herball,
   Apulia and other countries eastward,              1597).
   where the cods are so full of sweet               for youth for someone younger
   juice that it is used to preserve              347 delicate pleasant
   ginger. . . . Moreover both young and old      348 sanctimony holiness of life, perhaps
   feed thereon with pleasure. This is of            with a suggestion of hypocrisy (OED 1, 3).
   some called St. John’s bread, and thought         erring (a) wandering; (b) sinning. Cf.
   to be that which is translated locusts.’ Cf.      1.1.136, 1.2.26, 1.3.63, 341.
   also Revelation 10: 10: ‘It was then in my     349 barbarian (a) foreigner; savage; (b)
   mouth as sweet as honey: but when I had           inhabitant of Barbary, a ‘Barbary Moor’
   eaten it, my belly was bitter.’                   or Berber. Cf. Leo Africanus: ‘The tawny
   acerb bitter. Despite Q2’s preference for         people of the said region were called by
   F bitter, Q acerb is clearly preferable.          the name of Barbar, being derived of the
   Not only is it a characteristically               verb Barbara, which in their tongue signi-
   Shakespearian coinage, but one that               ﬁeth to murmur: because the African
   derives directly from the play’s Italian          tongue soundeth in the ears of the
   source where the Moor’s love for                  Arabian, no otherwise than the voice of
   Disdemona is transformed to ‘acerbissimo          beasts, which utter their sounds without
   odio [bitterest hate]’ (Honigmann, p.             any accents. Others will have Barbar to be
   374). It is not easy to see why the drama-        one word twice repeated, forsomuch as
   tist would have substituted the more com-         Bar in the Arabian tongue signiﬁeth a
   monplace word; unless, perhaps, he had            desert’ (1.5–6).
   come to think of acerb as too exotic for the      subtle (a) delicate, reﬁned; (b) cunning.
   generally plain-spoken, ‘honest’ Iago.         350 and . . . hell    Perhaps     an    aside
   Thus the F reading probably indicates             (Honigmann).
   some editorial sophistication of Shake-        352 clean . . . way completely out of the
   speare’s text, or even an unconscious sub-        question
   stitution (perhaps prompted by the echo

                                              237
1.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  compassing thy joy than to be drowned, and go without
  her.
roderigo Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the                                   355
  issue?
iago Thou art sure of me—go, make money!—I have
  told thee often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I
  hate the Moor. My cause is hearted; thine hath no
  less reason: let us be conjunctive in our revenge against                                  360
  him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a
  pleasure, me a sport. There are many events in the
  womb of Time which will be delivered. Traverse! Go!
  Provide thy money! We will have more of this tomorrow.
  Adieu.                                                                                     365
roderigo
  Where shall we meet i’th’ morning?
iago                                    At my lodging.
roderigo
  I’ll be with thee betimes.
iago                        Go to, farewell.


355–6 if . . . issue] f, q2; not in q1 358 re-tell] f; tell q 359 hath] f; has q       360 con-
junctive] f (coniunctiue), q2; communicatiue q1 362 me] f, q2; and me q1




353 compassing (a) achieving; possessing;            seems a more likely explanation than
   (b) embracing                                     revision—though that cannot be ex-
355 be fast to support steadfastly                   cluded. Alternatively, since the passage
359 hearted ﬁxed in the heart                        occurs near the bottom of the page in
360 conjunctive united, mutually sup-                F, poor casting off may be to blame
   portive                                           (Honigmann, Texts, p. 47). The omission
362–3 events . . . delivered Iago plays with         of l. 371 might result from eye-skip caused
   the proverb ‘Truth is child (or daughter)         by the repetition of purse in l. 372, if that
   of time’ (Tilley T580).                           repetition did not in any case make 371 sit
363 Traverse A military command (cf. 2               rather awkwardly in Q, where it may have
   Henry IV, 3.2.268; Merry Wives, 2.3.23)           been meant for cancellation; at the same
   whose exact signiﬁcance has been                  time, the opening of Iago’s soliloquy in Q
   debated by editors; it seems, however, to         seems less than adequately prepared for,
   involve a dodging movement from side to           at least in the absence of some reassur-
   side (OED v. 5, 15).                              ance like ‘I’ll sell all my land’. Honigmann
367 betimes early                                    conjectures that the Q compositor, hav-
367–71 Go . . . your purse Neither Q nor F           ing reached the end of his page and run
   seems entirely satisfactory here. F’s omis-       out of text, may even have interpolated
   sion of Iago’s teasing references to              padding of his own to ﬁll up the space
   Roderigo’s threats of drowning leaves ‘Do         (Texts, p. 47).
   you hear?’ (l. 368) a little unmotivated, so   367 Go to Exclamation of humorous
   that some scribal or compositorial error          impatience.

                                              238
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  1.3

  Do you hear, Roderigo?
roderigo                    What say you?
iago
  No more of drowning, do you hear?
roderigo                                I am changed:
  I’ll go sell all my land.                                                                370
iago
  Go to, farewell, put money enough in your purse.
                                                Exit Roderigo
  Thus do I ever make my fool my purse:
  For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
  If I would time expend with such a snipe,
  But for my sport and proﬁt. I hate the Moor,                                             375
  And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets
  He’s done my ofﬁce. I know not if’t be true,
  But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
  Will do as if for surety. He holds me well:
  The better shall my purpose work on him.                                                 380
  Cassio’s a proper man—let me see now:
  To get his place, and to plume up my will
  In double knavery. How? How? Let’s see—
368–9 What . . . changed] q; not in f 370 I’ll . . . land] q2; not in q1; Ile sell all my Land f
371 Go . . . your purse] q1; not in f, q2 371.1 Exit Roderigo] This edition; after ‘Land’ in f
(Exit.), q2; after ‘changed’ q1 374 a snipe] q; Snpe f 377 He’s] f2; She ha’s f1; H’as q
378 But] f; Yet q 382 his] f; this q plume] f, q2; make q1 383 In] f; A q Let’s] f; let
me q

373 gained hard won                                  2.1.285–90, is independently conﬁrmed
   profane abuse. The religious sense                by Emilia (4.2.145–7).
   (‘desecrate’) is also present, resonating      378 in that kind in that regard
   ironically with the ﬁnancial connotations      379 do . . . surety act as if it were certain
   of ‘gained’.                                      fact
374 snipe worthless creature, fool; the ﬁrst         well in high esteem
   example of this term of abuse in OED.          381 proper ideal, admirable, excellent; of
376 abroad widely                                    good character; handsome; perhaps also
377 done my ofﬁce i.e. made love to Emilia.          implying ‘a man ideally suited to my
   The use of this expression, as well as            purposes’.
   locating marriage inside a discourse of        382 place Cf. l. 377.
   domestic authority rather than love, links        plume up The exact sense is a little
   Iago’s resentment over the supposed               uncertain, but the phrase seems to mean
   usurpation of his bed with the usurpation         something like ‘preen’ or ‘adorn with
   of the military ‘ofﬁce’ or ‘place’ to which       feathers’ (OED v. 5); Honigmann suggests
   he believes himself entitled (1.1.8–32;           ‘rufﬂe the feathers’ (as e.g. in a breeding
   1.3.382); see Introduction, pp. 151–4.            display).
   Although some critics have been sceptical      383 double (a) doubly wicked; (b)
   of what Coleridge called ‘the motive hunt-        duplicitous
   ing of motiveless malignity’ (i. 49), Iago’s   383–5 How . . . wife Cf. Giraldi, App. C,
   sexual jealousy, which surfaces again at          p. 438.

                                              239
1.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

   After some time to abuse Othello’s ears
   That he is too familiar with his wife;                                                      385
   He hath a person and a smooth dispose
   To be suspected, framed to make women false.
   The Moor is of a free and open nature
   That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
   And will as tenderly be led by th’ nose                                                     390
   As asses are.
   I have’t! It is engendered: Hell and Night
   Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light.
                                                                                  Exit

2.1    Enter Montano, Governor of Cyprus, with two
       other Gentlemen
montano
  What from the cape can you discern at sea?
ﬁrst gentleman
  Nothing at all: it is a high-wrought ﬂood;
  I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the main
384 ears] f; eare q 386 hath] f; has q 388 The . . . nature] f, q2; The Moore a free and
open nature too q1 389 seem] f (seeme); seemes q 393.1 Exit] q; f omits
  2.1] f (Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.), q (Actus 2. Scœna 1.) 0.1–2 Enter . . . gentlemen] q
(Montanio); Enter Montano, and two Gentlemen. f 3 heaven] f, q2; hauen q1

385–6 he i.e. Cassio                                  were the outgoing Governor, Sanders
386 person ‘body with its clothing and                (p. 197) speculates that ‘ﬁrst and second
    adornment as presented to the sight of            authorial thoughts’ may have been
    others’ (OED n. 4a (b)).                          involved. Honigmann (Texts, p. 37) also
    dispose external manner                           takes the direction as evidence of author-
388 free generous, frank, spontaneous                 ial ﬁrst intentions; but, as McMillin points
390–1 And . . . are Q prints this as one line         out, it is just as likely to have a theatrical
    but with three dashes after nose, suggest-        origin, related to the requirements for
    ing that F’s lineation is meant to signal a       Montano’s costuming (Q, p. 13).
    similar pause before Iago completes his         2 high-wrought furiously agitated (earli-
    simile.                                           est citation in OED). Like the Turkish
390 tenderly gently, easily                           threat to Cyprus, the storm, with all its
    led . . . nose Proverbial (Dent N233, and         symbolic suggestiveness, involves a signi-
    cf. Tilley T221).                                 ﬁcant alteration to Giraldi’s story, in
392–3 engendered . . . birth Iago gives a             which the Moor and Disdemona cross to
    diabolical twist to the proverb he alluded        Cyprus ‘with a sea of utmost tranquillity’.
    to at ll. 362–3. Cf. also the related ‘Time       ﬂood sea
    brings the truth to light’ (Dent T324).         3 heaven . . . main i.e. the Gentleman
2.1.0.1 Enter . . . Gentlemen Q’s stage               vainly scans the sea for sails outlined
    direction gives the clearest indication of        against the sky. Honigmann (following
    Montano’s rank in the play, and this will         Malone) prefers Q’s haven; but in
    affect the way this (and subsequent scenes        Shakespeare’s time the two words (often
    involving this character) are to be played.       linked by associative word-play) were
    However, because neither Cassio nor Oth-          easily confused by both spelling and
    ello appears to treat him as though he            pronunciation.

                                              240
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.1

  Descry a sail.
montano
  Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land—                                                  5
  A fuller blast ne’er shook our battlements;
  If it hath rufﬁaned so upon the sea,
  What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
  Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
second gentleman
  A segregation of the Turkish ﬂeet:                                                          10
  For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
  The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
  The wind-shaked surge with high and monstrous mane
  Seems to cast water on the burning Bear
  And quench the guards of th’ever-ﬁxèd Pole.                                                 15
  I never did like molestation view
  On the enchafèd ﬂood.
montano                   If that the Turkish ﬂeet

5 hath spoke] f; does speake q 8 mountains . . . them] f (Mountaines), q2 (mountaine);
the huge mountaine mes lt q1 11 foaming] f, q2; banning q1 12 chidden] f; chiding q
13 mane] knight; Maine f; mayne q 15 ever-ﬁxèd] f; euer ﬁred q


 7 rufﬁaned raged, blustered (with a quib-            ‘mayne’, as in Q). Here a pun on main is
   ble on ‘roughen’)                                  inevitable.
 8 ribs of oak framing timbers of a ship         14   cast water throw water; but perhaps
   mountains mountainous waves                        also ‘urinate’, ‘vomit’ or ‘spew’ (cf. OED,
 9 mortise The joint(s) holding the ship’s            cast, v. 20c, 25a).
   timbers together.                                  Bear ‘probably the Little Bear [Ursa
10 segregation dispersal, splitting up (earli-        Minor], since the guards are the two stars
   est citation in OED)                               in that constellation next in brightness to
11 foaming Though Honigmann dismisses it              the Pole Star. They are frequently men-
   as ‘an easy misreading, improbable here’,          tioned, along with the Pole Star, as guides
   Sanders prefers Q banning (= chiding,              to navigation’ (Ridley).
   cursing), which is arguably the stronger      15   ever-ﬁxèd The Pole Star’s usefulness to
   alternative, extending as it does the              navigators seeking to take their bearings
   metaphor in the following line (‘chidden           was that it was one of the so-called ‘ﬁxed
   billow’); oddly enough, however, as                stars’. Honigmann justiﬁes Q’s euer ﬁred
   Delius pointed out, ‘banning’ makes bet-           by appealing to Iago’s ‘ever-burning
   ter sense with F’s ‘chidden’ than with Q’s         lights above’ (3.3.463), but the expression
   ‘chiding’.                                         seems slightly wrenched and a misread-
13 wind-shaked First example cited in                 ing would be easy.
   OED.                                          16   like molestation such turbulence.
   mane The wave-crests are imagined as               Molestation (from Latin molestare = to
   the ﬂying mane of some monstrous crea-             trouble) is not found elsewhere in
   ture (cf. the modern ‘white horses’); 17th-        Shakespeare and seems to be adapted
   century orthography did not distinguish            from Giraldi Cinthio’s estrema molestia
   between ‘main’ and ‘mane’ (either of               (Honigmann, p. 372).
   which could be spelt ‘maine’, as in F, or     17   enchafèd furious (literally ‘heated’;
                                                      earliest citation in OED)

                                             241
2.1                        Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned:
  It is impossible to bear it out.
         Enter a third Gentleman
third gentleman
  News, lads! Our wars are done:                                                        20
  The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks
  That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
  Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
  On most part of their ﬂeet.
montano How? Is this true?                                                               25
third gentleman The ship is here put in,
  A Veronese; Michael Cassio,
  Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
  Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
  And is in full commission here for Cyprus.                                            30
montano
  I am glad on’t; ’tis a worthy governor.
third gentleman
  But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
  Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly
  And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted
19 to] f, q2; they q1 19.1 Enter . . . gentleman] q; Enter a Gentleman. f 20 third gentle-
man] q (‘3 Gent.’ throughout); 3 f lads] f, q2; Lords q1 Our] f; your q 21 Turks] f
(Turkes); Turke q 22 A noble] f, q2; Another q1 24 their] f, q2; the q1 26–7 in, | A
Veronese; Michael Cassio] This edition after theobald (in, a Veronessa); in: A Verennessa,
Michael Cassio f, q (in: | A Veronessa,) 29 on shore] f; ashore q 34 prays] q (prayes);
praye f
18 embayed protected by a bay                    3.1.40. Neither of these contradictions is
19 bear it out weather the storm                 insuperable. Sanders suggests that ‘there
21 desperate extremely dangerous (literally      may lie behind F’s spelling . . . some par-
   ‘leaving no room for hope; inducing           ticular type of ship, perhaps a cutter
   despair’)                                     whose name was derived from the Italian
22 designment enterprise, undertaking            nautical term verrinare (= to cut
   halts wavers                                  through)’; more plausibly Honigmann
23 wrack destruction; shipwreck                  points out that Verona was at this time a
   sufferance damage (earliest use cited in      Venetian dependency and, though an
   OED); suffering                               inland city, supplied ships of its own at
25 A metrically amphibious line.                 the Battle of Lepanto. But if the F and Q
27 Veronese Four syllables (as in Italian).      punctuation is correct, then the seeming
   F and Q are unanimous in treating the         confusion probably represents a minor
   word as referring to Cassio, rather than      change of intention on Shakespeare’s
   (as editors since Theobald have assumed)      part regarding Cassio’s origins. Cf.
   the ship. Both readings are problematic:      4.1.115.
   the ship has just been identiﬁed as ‘A     30 is . . . Cyprus has been sent to Cyprus
   noble ship of Venice’, whilst Cassio has      with complete authority
   been denounced by Iago in the ﬁrst scene   33 Touching concerning
   as ‘a Florentine’, an identiﬁcation           sadly grave
   apparently conﬁrmed by Cassio himself at

                                          242
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  2.1

  With foul and violent tempest.
montano                              Pray heavens he be!                                    35
  For I have served him, and the man commands
  Like a full soldier. Let’s to the seaside, ho!—
  As well to see the vessel that’s come in
  As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
  Even till we make the main and th’aerial blue                                            40
  An indistinct regard.
third gentleman           Come, let’s do so:
  For every minute is expectancy
  Of more arrivance.
        Enter Cassio
cassio
  Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle
  That so approve the Moor. O, let the heavens                                              45
  Give him defence against the elements,
  For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
montano Is he well shipped?
cassio
  His barque is stoutly timbered, and his pilot
  Of very expert and approved allowance;                                                    50
  Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
  Stand in bold cure.
voices (shouting within) A sail, a sail, a sail!
cassio What noise?

35 heavens] f; Heauen q 39 throw out] q; throw-out f 40–1 Even . . . regard] f, q2; not
in q1 40 aerial] f (Eriall); Ayre all q2 41 third gentleman] q; Gent. f 43 arrivance] q;
Arriuancie f 44 Thanks, you the] knight; Thankes you, the f; Thankes to the q this] q;
the f warlike isle] f; worthy Isle q1; Isle q2 45 O, let] f (Oh let); and let q 46 the] f;
their q 51 hopes, not . . . death,] after f3; hope’s (not . . . death) f1, q2; hope’s
not . . . death q1 52 Stand . . . cure] f; Stand . . . cure. Enter a Messenger. q;
Stand . . . cure. Enter another Gentleman. capell 53 voices . . . within)] f (subs.: ‘Within’);
Mess. q


37 full soldier one possessing all the quali-    43 arrivance arrivals (earliest citation in
   ties of a true soldier                           OED)
40–1 Even . . . regard until (by dint of star-   45 approve commend, demonstrate the
   ing so hard) we make the ocean and blue          worth of
   sky indistinguishable. The omission of        50 Of . . . allowance acknowledged to be a
   this passage from Q leaves the ﬁrst line of      man of demonstrated expertise.
   the Third Gentleman’s speech metrically       51–2 not . . . cure though not dangerously
   incomplete, suggesting that a cut was            indulged, are conﬁdent of a successful
   involved.                                        outcome (cure continues the medical con-
40 aerial First recorded use in OED.                ceit in surfeited)
42 is expectancy gives expectation

                                             243
2.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

second gentleman
  The town is empty; on the brow o’th’ sea
  Stand ranks of people, and they cry ‘A sail!’                                                 55
cassio
  My hopes do shape him for the governor.
       A shot is heard
second gentleman
  They do discharge their shot of courtesy:
  Our friends, at least.
cassio                  I pray you, sir, go forth,
  And give us truth who ’tis that is arrived.
second gentleman                               I shall. Exit
montano
  But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?                                                 60
cassio
  Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid
  That paragons description and wild fame,
  One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
  And in th’essential vesture of creation,
  Does tire the ingener.
       Enter Second Gentleman
                          How now? Who has put in?                                             65

54 second gentleman] honigmann after f (Gent.); Mess. q 56 the governor] f (Gouernor);
guernement q1; gouernement q2 56.1 A shot is heard] q (‘A shot.’ after ‘least’, l. 58); not in f
57, 59, 66, 94 second gentleman] q (2 Gen.); Gent. f 57 their] f; the q 58 friends] f;
friend q 63 quirks of] f, q2; not in q1 65 tire the ingener] f (Ingeniuer); beare all excellen-
cy q1; beare an excellency q2 Second Gentleman] q (‘2. Gentleman’ after ‘in?’); Gentleman f
(after ‘ingener’) How now?] f; —now, q

56 shape him for imagine it is                       parts of a woman’s body. Schäfer cites as
57 shot of courtesy salute (with cannon or           earliest known use.
   musketry)                                      64 essential . . . creation An obscure pas-
61 achieved won (chivalric term for accom-           sage which has been variously explained:
   plishing a quest)                                 ‘the etherially pure, or celestial garb of her
62 paragons excels (earliest use cited in            nature’ (Hart); ‘the quintessence of love-
   OED). In Renaissance aesthetic discourse          liness’ (Walker); ‘as God made her’
   paragone was the mode of emulous imita-           (Ridley); ‘absolute beauty of the human
   tion through which an artist strove to            form’ (Sanders); ‘in the essential clothing
   outreach his predecessors.                        in which she was born’ or ‘in her inner-
   wild fame the most extravagant rumour             most nature (essential vesture = soul, not
63 quirks fantastic conceits                         body)’ (Honigmann). It is possible, how-
   blazoning Originally heraldic (‘describ-          ever, that ‘creation’ refers to the creativi-
   ing or depicting according to the rules of        ty of the artist, and ‘vesture’ to the
   heraldry’), but often more loosely used to        rhetorical ‘dress’ in which the poet seeks
   refer to either honourable or boastful            to capture the essential nature of female
   description. In love poetry a ‘blazon’ was        beauty.
   an elaborate ﬁgurative cataloguing of the      65 tire (a) exhaust; (b) attire

                                             244
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.1

second gentleman
  ’Tis one Iago, ensign to the general.
cassio
  He’s had most favourable and happy speed:
  Tempests themselves, high seas and howling winds,
  The guttered rocks and congregated sands
  (Traitors ensteeped to clog the guiltless keel)                                            70
  As having sense of beauty, do omit
  Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
  The divine Desdemona.
montano                    What is she?
cassio
  She that I spake of: our great captain’s captain,
  Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,                                                       75
  Whose footing near anticipates our thoughts
  A sennight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard
  And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath
  That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
  Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms,                                               80
  Give renewed ﬁre to our extincted spirits
        Enter Desdemona, Iago, Roderigo, and Emilia
  And bring all Cyprus comfort—O, behold,
  The riches of the ship is come on shore!
  You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
67 cassio] f; not in q He’s] after f (Ha’s); He has q 68 high] f, q2; by q1 70 ensteeped]
f (ensteep’d), q2; enscerped q1 clog] q; enclogge f 72 mortal] f; common q 74 spake]
f, q2; spoke q1 80 Make . . . in] f; And swiftly come to q 81.1 Enter . . . Emilia] f; after
‘arms’ (l. 80) q 82 And . . . comfort] q; not in f 83 on shore] f, q2; ashore q1 84 You]
f; Ye q

   ingener An old form of ‘engineer’ = one          might be a version of enscarped or escarped
   who contrives, designs, or invents; an           (= steep), but this does not ﬁt the image
   author (OED, engineer, n. 1); cf. also           of treacherous sandbanks; in any case, of
   ingener, v. (from Latin ingenerare = engen-      these alternatives, only the latter is listed
   der). Both because the metre requires a          in OED, and not before 1728. C/t and e/r
   stress on the ﬁrst syllable, and because         misreadings are, however, quite possible.
   there is a subdued quibble on ‘ingenious’,       clog The Q reading ﬁts the metre better;
   it seems best to preserve the old spelling.      elision is possible, but F’s enclog is prob-
                                                    ably contaminated by ensteeped.
69 guttered furrowed, gullied; hence             71–2 omit . . . natures        refrain     from
   ‘jagged’ (Sanders).                              indulging their deadly natures
   congregated         sands    sandbanks        75 in the conduct of to be escorted by
   (Honigmann)                                   76 footing landing
70 ensteeped      submerged;    apparently       77 sennight week
   coined from steep, v.1 (OED, citing only      79 tall handsome; doughty; tall-masted
   this example). As White (following            80 quick (a) lively; (b) rapid
   Steevens) suggested, Q’s ‘enscerped’          81 extincted extinguished

                                             245
2.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Hail to thee, lady; and the grace of heaven,                                                85
  Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
  Enwheel thee round!
desdemona                I thank you, valiant Cassio.
  What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
cassio
  He is not yet arrived; nor know I aught
  But that he’s well and will be shortly here.                                               90
desdemona
  O, but I fear—how lost you company?
cassio
  The great contention of sea and skies
  Parted our fellowship.
       Voices shout within: ‘A sail, a sail!’
                           But hark—a sail!
       jA shot is heardk
second gentleman
  They give their greeting to the citadel:
  This likewise is a friend.
cassio                      See for the news.                                                 95
                                         Exit Second Gentleman
  Good ensign, you are welcome. Welcome, mistress!
       He kisses Emilia
88 me] q; not in f 92 sea] f; the sea q 93 Voices . . . sail] collier; Within A Saile, a Saile.
f, after ‘Hearke, a Saile’ (l. 93); [within.] A saile, a saile. q, after ‘company’ (l. 91) 93.1
A . . . heard] capell (subs.); not in f, q 94 their] q; this f 95 See . . . news] f, q2; So
speakes this voyce q1 95.1 Exit . . . Gentleman] capell; not in f, q 96.1 He kisses Emilia]
johnson (subs.); not in f, q

85 Hail . . . heaven Honigmann suggests a            Voices . . . sail Unlike the previous cry
   possible echo of the ‘Hail Mary’ at this          ‘within’ which completes a line (l. 52),
   point.                                            this one is extra-metrical; so it should
85–7 thee Honigmann notes Cassio’s use of            probably be treated as a background
   the intimate form in this moment of               noise, rather than as part of the dialogue.
   excitement; later he reverts to the more       96–9 Good . . . courtesy Honigmann de-
   decorous you.                                     tects ‘a touch of condescension’ in the
87 Enwheel encircle, surround; with a play           repetition of ‘good’, a term of approba-
   on the wheeling movement of the heavens           tion often used to greet social inferiors
   (earliest use recorded in OED and almost          (pp. 85, 168). Cassio’s ﬂowery explana-
   certainly a coinage).                             tion of his ‘courtesy’ and ‘breeding’ is, of
92 The . . . skies For metrical reasons,             course, even more insulting, implying as
   most editors prefer the Q reading ‘the sea’       it does that the kiss which he gives Iago’s
   here; but F scans perfectly well if ‘con-         wife is a reﬁnement of courtly manners
   tention’ is treated as four syllables with a      which a rough soldier like Iago could not
   stress on the ﬁrst and fourth syllables.          possibly understand. An actor will have to
93 fellowship company; i.e. the group of             decide whether the insult, like the kiss
   ships (OED n. 6).                                 itself, is simply a sign of Cassio’s poor

                                              246
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  2.1

  Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
  That I extend my manners. ’Tis my breeding
  That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
iago
  Sir, would she give you so much of her lips                                              100
  As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
  You’d have enough.
desdemona Alas, she has no speech!
iago In faith, too much!
  I ﬁnd it still when I have leave to sleep.                                               105
  Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,
  She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
  And chides with thinking.
emilia                         You have little cause to say so.
iago
  Come on, come on! You are pictures out of doors;
  Bells in your parlours; wild-cats in your kitchens;                                      110

100 Sir] f, q2; For q1 101 oft bestows] f; has bestowed q 102 You’d] q; You would f
104 In faith] f, q2; I know q1 105 it still] f, q2; it, I q1 when] f; for when q have leave]
f, q2 (ha’ leaue); ha’ list q1 109 of doors] q2; of doore f; adores q1


   judgement, or whether it is a calculated          reply; she means either that Emilia has
   affront, responding to a tension that             been struck dumb with embarrassment,
   already exists between them. Though               or that she is far from being the garrulous
   kissing (in England, if not in Italy) was a       nagger that Iago describes; or perhaps
   normal method of greeting and need not            that the ﬁrst proves the second.
   have implied any ﬂirtation, Cassio seems       105 still always
   somewhat self-conscious about the ‘bold-          leave permission (frequently, as here,
   ness’ of his gesture. Cf. also Commentary         used ironically)
   1.3.159.                                       106 before . . . ladyship in your ladyship’s
                                                     presence
98 extend my manners take such unusual            107–8 She . . . thinking i.e. she keeps her
   freedoms in my behaviour                          shrewish speeches to herself. The heart is
   breeding Whilst breeding could some-              often imaged as a cabinet of secrets.
   times refer to ‘birth’ or ‘lineage’, it more   109–13 You . . . beds Cf. Dent W702,
   usually denoted ‘upbringing’, ‘educa-             ‘Women are in church saints, abroad
   tion’, or the results of such training.           angels, at home devils’.
99 courtesy elegant manners; in this period       109 You are The metre requires elision here
   a term still largely conﬁned to the world of      (‘you’re’).
   courtiers, and therefore containing an            pictures The contrast with clanging bells
   implicit claim to social superiority on           seems to require something like Sanders’s
   Cassio’s part.                                    ‘silent appearances (of virtue)’. A picture
101 tongue ‘Iago coarsely hints at kissing,          could be a sculpture as well as a painting;
   as well as scolding, with the tongue’             but Kittredge was probably right to sense
   (Honigmann).                                      ‘a suggestion that they owe their beauty
103 Alas . . . speech Amphibious. Before             to painting’.
   Cassio can respond, Desdemona inter-           110 parlours Playing on the original mean-
   venes playfully, as if to defuse the grow-        ing of a ‘room set aside for conversation’
   ing hostility registered in Iago’s sarcastic      (Honigmann).

                                              247
2.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Saints in your injuries; devils being offended;
  Players in your housewifery; and housewives
  In your beds.
desdemona        O ﬁe upon thee, slanderer!
iago
  Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:
  You rise to play, and go to bed to work.                                                  115
emilia
  You shall not write my praise.
iago                               No, let me not.
desdemona
  What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise
       me?
iago
  O gentle lady, do not put me to’t,
  For I am nothing if not critical.
desdemona
  Come on, assay—there’s one gone to the harbour?                                          120
iago Ay, madam.
desdemona
  I am not merry; but I do beguile
  The thing I am by seeming otherwise.
  Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
113 desdemona] f, q2; not in q1 117 wouldst thou] q; wouldst f

112 Players actors, triﬂers; with a bawdy            behaving as a barbarian or savage; one
   quibble on sexual ‘play’ (cf. l. 116).            who treats his wife hardly’ (OED n. 4),
   housewives Cf. 1.3.270; 4.1.89.                   Iago too may be regarded as a Christian
   Oxford’s ‘hussies’ gets the meaning but           ‘turned Turk’.
   obscures the word-play, which an actor         115 rise . . . play . . . work All three words
   might still be able to activate, however,         contain sexual innuendo: the implication
   by pronouncing ‘hussifry . . . hussifs’.          is that fornication is women’s only pas-
   Murphy suggests a double word-play on             time and business.
   the two senses of ‘housewife’: ‘ “you          116 praise i.e. verses in my praise
   take your [domestic] duties lightly and        117–18 What . . . me Desdemona again
   are promiscuous” . . . or “you manage             intervenes to deﬂect an argument, this
   your households economically and are              time between Iago and Emilia. Q (which
   equally parsimonious with your sexual             assumes a feminine ending) seems
   favours” ’.                                       metrically preferable here since the sense
114 I . . . Turk A hybrid of Dent J49.1 (‘I am       requires that Desdemona’s ﬁrst me be
   a Jew . . . else’) and T609 (‘To turn Turk’,      stressed and the second unstressed.
   i.e. convert to Islam); particularly appro-    118 put me to’t put me to the test
   priate to a play in which a Moor turned        120 assay In early modern English essay (=
   Christian ends by symbolically ‘turning           attempt) and assay (= make trial of) were
   Turk’ (5.2.351–5). Since the extended             not distinct, and both meanings are prob-
   meanings of Turk included ‘a cruel,               ably involved here.
   rigorous, or tyrannical man; anyone            122 beguile divert attention from (OED v. 5)

                                              248
                                Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.1

iago
  I am about it; but indeed my invention                                                       125
  Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze—
  It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labours,
  And thus she is delivered:
  If she be fair and wise: fairness and wit,
  The one’s for use, the other useth it.                                                       130
desdemona
  Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
iago
  If she be black and thereto have a wit,

127 brains] f (Braines); braine q 129–30, 132–3, 135–6, 140–1, 146–58] as here q1; in italic
f, q2 130 useth] f, q2; vsing q1


126 birdlime A glutinous substance spread               good judgement; but in the context of the
   on trees and bushes to entrap birds.                 clever verbal play between Iago and
   frieze Usually a kind of coarse woollen              Desdemona (reminiscent of the conven-
   cloth with a nap (to which birdlime would            tional banter between Lady and Fool in
   easily stick); but frieze could also be used         the comedies) the hint of cleverness and
   to describe the nap on plants, and this              intellectual sparkle is also appropriate.
   may be what is meant here.                        132–3 black . . . white A complex piece of
127–8 labours . . . delivered Iago’s quib-              word-play: in addition to the pun on wight
   bling picks up the metaphors of preg-                (= man), there is also a quibble on wit (=
   nancy and giving birth that conclude his             man of wit), possibly because the diph-
   soliloquy at the end of Act 1.                       thongization of the i in white was not
129–58 If . . . beer F’s use of italics for             complete in Shakespearian English (see
   Iago’s rhyming verses highlights the ele-            Dobson, ii, section 12.1). Blackness here is
   ment of self-conscious quotation in what             a typical piece of Iago bawdy: like black
   Desdemona mockingly calls his ‘old fond              itself, it could refer (via the pubic hair)
   paradoxes’ (l. 137).                                 to the female sex organs (Williams,
129–47 If . . . loud Honigmann notes the                Dictionary, pp. 110–11, Glossary, p. 43).
   play with proverbial formulations: ‘Fair             Moreover, the couplet that Williams cites
   and foolish, black and proud, long and               from the pseudo-Donne lyric ‘On Black
   lazy, little and loud’ (Dent F28).                   Hayre and Eyes’ (‘if I might direct my
129 fair (a) beautiful; (b) fair-haired                 shaft aright, | The black mark would I hit
   wit intelligence                                     and not the white’) and another from
130 use . . . useth The obscene innuendo is             Brome’s The English Moor (c.1637: ‘This is
   clear enough: Iago is suggesting that an             the worthy man whose wealth and wit, |
   intelligent woman will know how to                   To make a white one must the black mark
   employ her beauty by making her body                 hit’, 4.4.59–60) suggest that a further
   available for use, i.e. sexual ‘use’ for a usu-      play on white = centre of an archery
   rious return (prostitution). Cf. Revenger’s          target (nowadays the ‘gold’) is involved.
   Tragedy, 2.2.97: ‘Her tongue has turned              Thus Q’s hit seems likely to be the correct
   my sister into use.’                                 reading here, a conclusion supported
131 black Depending on its context this                 by a similar passage of bawdy in LLL
   could mean either ‘dark-skinned’ or                  (4.1.107–38). F’s ﬁt, while equally ob-
   ‘dark-haired’. The latter is the primary             scene, misses the point of the conceit, and
   meaning here, but the play’s preoccupa-              in some Elizabethan hands would have
   tion with ‘colour’ makes the other mean-             been a possible misreading for hit.
   ing impossible to exclude, and Iago’s reply       132 wit To the meanings already in play Iago
   immediately activates it.                            adds a suggestion of ‘ingenuity’ or
   witty wise, intelligent, endowed with                ‘cunning’.

                                                 249
2.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  She’ll ﬁnd a white that shall her blackness hit.
desdemona
  Worse and worse.
emilia               How if fair and foolish?
iago
  She never yet was foolish that was fair,                                                135
  For even her folly helped her to an heir.
desdemona These are old fond paradoxes to make fools
  laugh i’th’ alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for
  her that’s foul and foolish?
iago
  There’s none so foul and foolish thereunto,                                             140
  But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
desdemona O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst
  best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving
  woman indeed? One that, in the authority of her merit,
  did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself.                                      145
iago
  She that was ever fair and never proud,
  Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
  Never lacked gold and yet went never gay,
  Fled from her wish and yet said ‘Now I may’;
  She that being angered, her revenge being nigh,                                         150
  Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure ﬂy;
  She that in wisdom never was so frail

133 hit] q1; ﬁt f, q2 136 an heir] f, q2; a haire q1 137 fond] f; not in q    142 Thou prais-
est] f (thou); that praises q 144 merit] f; merrits q


134 Worse and worse ‘Said admiringly              141 pranks sexual tricks
   in wit-combats’ (Honigmann); cf. the           142 heavy intense
   admiring use of ‘bad’, ‘mean’, ‘wicked’ in     143–4 deserving . . . indeed        genuinely
   modern idiomatic usage.                           deserving woman
134–5 foolish Desdemona’s ‘foul and               144–5 One . . . itself one whose virtue had
   foolish’ (l. 138) suggests that, in the con-      such conﬁdent authority that she could
   text of jokes about fairness and blackness        reasonably encourage malice itself to tes-
   a fool/foul (= black) pun may be involved         tify against her (OED, put, v. 47h)
   here (see Kökeritz, p. 75; cf. 1.2.62,         147 Had . . . will could always speak as elo-
   5.2.232, 322).                                    quently as occasion demanded
136 folly (a) foolishness; (b) unchastity         148 gay showily dressed
   helped . . . heir (a) helped her to marry      149 Fled . . . may turned her back on her
   a rich heir; (b) helped her to produce a          desires even when she knew she was in a
   bastard son (Honigmann)                           position to fulﬁl them
137 fond foolish                                  151 Bade . . . stay restrained her sense of
139–40 foul (a) ugly; (b) dirty; (c) black; (d)      injustice
   wicked; (e) obscene, revolting                 152 frail morally weak

                                              250
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  2.1

  To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail;
  She that could think and ne’er disclose her mind,
  See suitors following and not look behind:                                             155
  She was a wight—if ever such wights were—
desdemona To do what?
iago
  To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
desdemona O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do
  not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband.                                    160
  How say you, Cassio, is he not a most profane and liberal
  counsellor?
cassio He speaks home, madam: you may relish him more
  in the soldier than in the scholar.
iago (aside) He takes her by the palm—ay, well said, whis-                               165
  per!—with as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a
  ﬂy as Cassio.—Ay, smile upon her, do! I will gyve thee in
  thine own courtship.—You say true, ’tis so indeed.—If
  such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it

155 See . . . behind] f, q2; not in q1 156 wights] f; wight q 166 with] f, q2; not in q1 I]
f, q2; not in q1 167 ﬂy] f, q2 (Flie); Flee q1 gyve] f2; giue f1; catch q 167–8 thee in
thine own courtship] f; you in your owne courtesies q1; you in your own courtship q2


153 change . . . tail Honigmann cites Pliny       beer’, but here ‘trivial matters’ (ﬁrst
   on ﬁsh tails as a delicacy to suggest          recorded use in OED).
   that the ﬁrst meaning is ‘to exchange       159 impotent conclusion In the context of
   something worthless for something of           Iago’s bawdy jokes it is difﬁcult to avoid
   greater value’; although Balz Engler sug-      the bawdy sense of conclusion (= ‘but-
   gests that the proper contrast is between      tocks’ or ‘coitus’): see Rubinstein, pp. 54,
   the worthy head and the ignoble tail,          92, 143, and cf. l. 254 and 3.3.429.
   the general meaning remains the same        161 profane irreverent, wicked, ribald
   (‘Othello, II.i.155: “To Change the Cod’s      liberal licentious (OED a. 3a)
   Head for the Salmon’s Tail” ’, SQ 35        163 home to the point, directly; so as to
   (1984), 202–3). But, as critics since          penetrate effectually (cf. ‘thrust home’)
   Partridge have recognized, the familiar     163–4 relish . . . in appreciate him more in
   bawdy senses of cod (testicles), head          the role of
   (penis), tail (female or, sometimes, male   165 well said As Ridley and others note, this
   sex organs), together with the sexual          can simply mean ‘well done’; but cf. ‘You
   associations of ﬁsh, make an obscene           say true’ (l. 170).
   construction inevitable. Despite the        167 gyve fetter
   heavy weather made of this, the meaning     168 courtship courtly behaviour (with a
   seems clear enough: Iago (habitually           sardonic play on ‘wooing’)
   thinking of all women as whores) ima-          You . . . indeed Since their conversation
   gines sexual congress between the male         is inaudible to the audience, it is probably
   and female members as a form of com-           meant to be so to Iago also; but he may
   mercial exchange.                              emphasize his sarcasm by an elaborate
156 wight person                                  show of eavesdropping.
158 small beer Literally ‘weak or inferior     169 lieutenantry First recorded use in OED.

                                           251
2.1                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  had been better you had not kissed your three ﬁngers so                                 170
  oft, which now again you are most apt to play the sir in.—
  Very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! ’Tis so
  indeed.—Yet again, your ﬁngers to your lips? Would they
  were clyster-pipes for your sake.
        Trumpets within
  (Aloud) The Moor! I know his trumpet.
cassio                                     ’Tis truly so.                                 175
desdemona
  Let’s meet him and receive him.
cassio                               Lo, where he comes!
        Enter Othello and attendants
othello
  O, my fair warrior!
desdemona              My dear Othello!
othello
  It gives me wonder great as my content
  To see you here before me. O my soul’s joy,
  If after every tempest come such calms,                                                 180
  May the winds blow till they have wakened death,
  And let the labouring barque climb hills of seas
  Olympus-high, and duck again as low
  As hell’s from heaven. If it were now to die,
  ’Twere now to be most happy; for I fear                                                 185
  My soul hath her content so absolute

170 kissed] f; rist q 172 Very] f, q2; not in q1 and] f, q2; an q1 173 to] f; at q 174
clyster-pipes] q (Clisterpipes); Cluster-pipes f 174.1 Trumpets within] q (after ‘Trumpet’,
l. 175); not in f 175 Aloud] oxford; not in f, q 176.1 Enter . . . attendants] f; after ‘Trum-
pets within’ (l. 175) q 180 calms] f (Calmes); calmnesse q


170 kissed . . . ﬁngers A courtly gesture of        pp. 125–44, and Ben Saunders, ‘Iago’s
   ﬂirtation similarly mocked for its foppish       Clyster: Purgation, Anality, and the
   extravagance in LLL (4.1.145) and Twelfth        Civilizing Process’, SQ 55 (2004), 148–76.
   Night (3.4.30–1).                             175 his trumpet See App. D (i). Each com-
171 play the sir play the gallant                   mander had his own distinctive trumpet
172 and . . . courtesy F’s and suggests that        call; here, as at Troilus, 4.6.65 (‘The
   courtesy = bow (cf. modern curtsy), while        Trojans’ trumpet’), a play on ‘strumpet’ is
   Q’s an seems to make it descriptive of the       probably involved.
   hand-kissing (= courtly behaviour). If        180 If . . . calms Dent S908, ‘After a storm
   McMillin’s theories are correct, Q may           comes calm’.
   reﬂect a scribal mishearing.                  181 wakened death An apocalyptic image
174 clyster-pipes enema tubes (ﬁrst citation        (cf. the more usual ‘wakened the dead’).
   in OED). For perceptive psychoanalytical      183 Olympus The mountain on which the
   accounts of Iago’s preoccupation with            Greek gods were supposed to dwell; here
   purging and evacuation, see Adelman,             standing for heaven (l. 180).

                                            252
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   2.1

  That not another comfort like to this
  Succeeds in unknown fate.
desdemona                       The heavens forbid
  But that our loves and comforts should increase
  Even as our days do grow.
othello                        Amen to that, sweet powers!                                 190
  I cannot speak enough of this content:
  It stops me here, it is too much of joy.
        They kiss
  And this, and this the greatest discords be
  That e’er our hearts shall make.
iago (aside)                      O, you are well tuned now!
  But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music,                                         195
  As honest as I am.
othello (to Desdemona) Come, let us to the castle.
  (To the rest) News, friends: our wars are done, the Turks
        are drowned.
  How does my old acquaintance of this isle?—
  Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus;
  I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,                                        200
  I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
  In mine own comforts!—I prithee, good Iago,

190 powers] f, q2; power q1 192.1 They kiss] q (after ‘be’, l. 193); not in f   193 discords] f;
discord q 198 does my] f (do’s), q2; doe our q1 this] f, q2; the q1


188 Succeeds . . . fate can possibly ensue          term for intercourse and of peg as a
   in our unknowable, but predetermined             word for penis (see Williams, Dictionary,
   future                                           pp. 922–4, 1006–7), thereby threatening
190 as . . . grow as we grow older                  Othello with emasculation.
192 stops me here Sanders suggests ‘pre-         196 As . . . am An ironic backward glance at
   vents me in my heart’; but Othello prob-         ‘I am not what I am’ (1.1.65); several
   ably means that his emotions choke his           meanings of honest are in play:
   organs of speech. In either case here can        ‘honourable’; ‘upright, of good charac-
   be gestural, referring to his heart, or may      ter’; ‘frank, truthful, straightforward’.
   simply mean ‘here and now; at this            198 acquaintance friends
   point’. For the physiological basis of        199 well desired much sought after
   Othello’s emotion, see Paster, pp. 64–6.      200 great love Perhaps a reminder of the
193–4 discords . . . hearts As so often in          traditional associations of Cyprus as the
   the period, the musical metaphor (which          birthplace of the love-goddess, Aphrodite,
   Iago develops, ll. 191–2) is complicated by      and a centre of her cult (see Neill,
   a recollection of the Latin root of discord      ‘Places’, p. 117).
   and concord (cor = heart).                    201 out of fashion clumsily; inappro-
195 set . . . pegs i.e. untune the instrument       priately
   by loosening its strings; Iago probably       201–2 dote . . . comforts am besotted with
   quibbles on the bawdy use of music as a          sheer happiness

                                             253
2.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
  Bring thou the master to the citadel;
  He is a good one, and his worthiness                                                     205
  Does challenge much respect.—Come, Desdemona,
  Once more well met at Cyprus!
             Exeunt Othello and Desdemona followed by all but
             Iago and Roderigo
iago (to a departing attendant) Do thou meet me presently at
  the harbour. (To Roderigo) Come hither, if thou be’st
  valiant—as they say base men being in love have then a                                   210
  nobility in their natures more than is native to them—list
  me: the lieutenant tonight watches on the court of
  guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in
  love with him.
roderigo With him? Why, ’tis not possible.                                                 215
iago Lay thy ﬁnger thus, and let thy soul be instructed:
  mark me with what violence she ﬁrst loved the Moor but
  for bragging, and telling her fantastical lies. To love him
207.1–2 Exeunt . . . Roderigo] after f (Exit Othello and Desdemona.); Exit q 209 hither] q;
thither f 213 must . . . this: Desdemona] f; will tell thee, this Desdemona q1; will tell thee
this, Desdemona q2 218 To] f; and will she q

203 disembark my coffers unload my                   corps de garde, meaning either the ‘body of
   chests and trunks. Honigmann notes that           soldiers on guard’, or the guard-house
   Othello ‘treats Iago almost as a personal         itself (OED n. 1, 2).
   servant’, which perhaps accounts for the       213 directly completely, unambiguously.
   alacrity with which the ensign starts issu-    216–61 Lay . . . minister In Iago’s speeches
   ing his own orders as soon as Othello is          here there is an exceptional amount of
   offstage.                                         variation between F and Q, including a
204 master ship’s captain                            large number of words and phrases found
206 challenge claim, invite (i.e. deserve)           only in the former. This may indicate
207 well met at welcome to                           detailed revision of the passage or (if
208–9 thou . . . thou Since Roderigo is              memorial contamination is involved)
   later instructed to meet Iago at the              the slightly greater difﬁculty involved in
   citadel (l. 274), Delius is surely right to       accurately mastering long passages of
   suppose that the ﬁrst thou is addressed to a      prose.
   servant: a context that will make Iago’s       216 Lay . . . thus i.e. on his lips. Listed by
   switch to the condescending singular              Tilley and Dent as a proverb (F239); but in
   pronoun seem especially insulting to              reality this is the standard gesture for
   Roderigo.                                         silence prescribed by classical rhetori-
210 base low-born. Either Iago now feels             cians, described by Jonson in Bartholomew
   conﬁdent enough of his power over                 Fair (5.6.20) and Timber (p. 15) in the
   Roderigo (who appears to be Iago’s social         phrase digito compesce labellum, and illus-
   superior, and is described as a ‘gentle-          trated in John Bulwer’s Chirologia: or
   man’ in F’s ‘Names of the Actors’) to             the Natural Language of the Hand and Chi-
   insult him openly, or this parenthesis may        ronomia: or, The Art of Manual Rhetoric
   be (as Honigmann conjectures) an aside.           (1644) over the inscription Tacite (be
212 watches is on watch-duty                         quiet).
   court of guard A corruption of French          217 violence excessive ardour (OED n. 5)

                                              254
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.1

   still for prating? Let not thy discreet heart think it! Her
   eye must be fed. And what delight shall she have to look                                  220
   on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of
   sport, there should be a game to inﬂame it, and (to give
   satiety a fresh appetite) loveliness in favour, sympathy in
   years, manners, and beauties—all which the Moor is
   defective in. Now, for want of these required conve-                                      225
   niences, her delicate tenderness will ﬁnd itself abused,
   begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor;
   very nature will instruct her in it, and compel her to some
   second choice. Now sir, this granted (as it is a most preg-
   nant and unforced position), who stands so eminent in                                     230
   the degree of this fortune, as Cassio does—a knave very
   voluble, no further conscionable than in putting on the
   mere form of civil and humane seeming for the better
   compass of his salt and most hidden loose affection? Why
219 thy] f; the q 219 it] f; q2; so q1 222 a game] f, q2; againe q1 222 and (to give]
after f (and to giue); and giue q 223 appetite) loveliness] This edition after theobald (appetite,
loveliness); appetite. Louelinesse f; appetite. Loue lines q1; appetite. Louelines q2 228 in]
f; to q 230 eminent] f; eminently q fortune] f (Forune), q] 232 further] f; farder q
233 humane seeming] f, q2; hand-seeming qu 234 compass] f; compassing q 234
most . . . affection] f, q2; hidden affections q1 234–5 Why none, why none] f; not in q

219 still for prating for his continual               abused cheated, deceived
   boasting                                        227 heave the gorge retch
   discreet judicious                                 disrelish ﬁnd disgusting
221 devil Cf 1.1.87–92.                            227 very nature nature itself
   dull sluggish. The juxtaposition with           229–30 pregnant convincing (from OF
   inﬂame is a reminder of the subdued quib-          preindre = ‘to press’ and therefore etymo-
   ble on Greek moros (mwróz) = ‘dull, stu-           logically unrelated to female pregnancy,
   pid’ and Med. Latin morus = ‘Moor’,                though the two homonyms were fre-
   which makes of the union between the               quently confused).
   fair Desdemona and the dark Othello a           230 unforced          position       plausible
   kind of punningly embodied oxymoron                hypothesis
   (= ‘bright-dull’). See also 5.2.224, and        230–1 who . . . fortune who is better
   cf. 4.3.37.                                        placed to beneﬁt from this turn of events
222 sport copulation                                  (so eminent in the degree = on so high a
   a game amorous sport or play (OED n.               rung of the ladder)
   3b). Q2’s preference for the more sugges-       231 knave (a) crafty rogue; (b) man of low
   tive F reading is signiﬁcant; Q’s againe           birth. Iago’s obsessive harping on the
   (though preferred by most editors) is              word (ll. 235, 238, 240) reveals his social
   weaker and could easily result from either         resentment against Cassio.
   misreading or aural confusion.                  232 voluble (a) full of glib eloquence; (b)
223 satiety surfeit, satiation                        inconstant
   favour appearance; face                            no . . . than whose conscience does not
   sympathy afﬁnity, similarity                       extend beyond
225–6 required conveniences necessary              233 humane courteous
   advantages                                      234 compass compassing, achieving
226 delicate fragile, vulnerable.                     salt lecherous
   tenderness youthfulness; soft-hearted-             affection passion, lust
   ness, impressionability; love

                                              255
2.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  none, why none—a slipper and subtle knave, a ﬁnder                                    235
  of occasion, that has an eye can stamp and counterfeit
  advantages (though true advantage never present itself),
  a devilish knave! Besides, the knave is handsome, young,
  and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green
  minds look after—a pestilent complete knave, and the                                  240
  woman hath found him already.
roderigo I cannot believe that in her: she’s full of most
  blest condition.
iago Blest ﬁg’s end! The wine she drinks is made of grapes.
  If she had been blest, she would never have loved the                                 245
  Moor. Blest pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with
  the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?
roderigo Yes, that I did—but that was but courtesy.
iago Lechery, by this hand!—an index and obscure
  prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts. They                               250
  met so near with their lips that their breaths embraced
  together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo! When these
  mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the
  master and main exercise, th’incorporate conclusion.
  Pish! But sir, be you ruled by me—I have brought you                                  255

235 slipper and subtle] f (slipper, and subtle); subtle slippery q 236 of occasion] f; out of
occasions q has] q; he’s f 237 advantages . . . itself] f, q2; the true aduantages neuer pre-
sent themselues q1 238 a devilish knave] f (A); not in q 239 hath] f; has q 246 Blest
pudding] f; not in q 247 Didst not mark that] f, q2; not in q1 248 that I did] f; not in q
252 Villainous . . . Roderigo] f; not in q1; villanous thoughts q2 253 mutualities] q; muta-
bilities f hard at hand] f; hand at hand q 254 master and] f; not in q1; master and the q2
255 Pish] f; not in q


235 slipper shifty, deceitful, insincere (OED    249 index table of contents; preface, pro-
   a. 3)                                            logue. Since Iago is explicating a manual
   subtle crafty (the adjective applied to the      gesture, and has just sworn by his own
   serpent who tempts Eve in Genesis)               hand, some sort of gestural word-play
236 occasion opportunity                            must also be indicated, punning on the
   stamp coin                                       pointing index[-ﬁnger] often used to draw
240 complete consummate; but also a                 attention to signiﬁcant passages in early
   sneer at Cassio’s courtliness: ‘accom-           modern books.
   plished’.                                     253 mutualities exchanges of intimacy
241 found him found him out, discovered          254 main Probably punning on French main
   what he’s up to (by implication, with            to continue (with hard at hand and incor-
   pleasure); Honigmann suggests a possible         porate) the word-play on hand.
   bawdy meaning.                                   incorporate (a) bodily; (b) united in one
244 ﬁg’s end For ﬁg see 1.3.315;                    body (like the ‘beast with two backs’ as
   end = genitalia.                                 Honigmann suggests)
246 pudding sausage; slang for ‘penis’ (see         conclusion See l. 159, and 3.3.429.
   Williams, Dictionary, pp. 1106–7).            255–7 be . . . upon you Although Iago has
   paddle toy, play idly                            returned to the polite plural form of

                                             256
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 2.1

  from Venice. Watch you tonight. For the command, I’ll
  lay’t upon you: Cassio knows you not; I’ll not be far from
  you; do you ﬁnd some occasion to anger Cassio, either by
  speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what
  other course you please which the time shall more                                       260
  favourably minister.
roderigo Well.
iago Sir, he’s rash and very sudden in choler, and haply
  with his truncheon may strike at you—provoke him that
  he may; for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus                               265
  to mutiny, whose qualiﬁcation shall come into no true
  taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So shall you
  have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I
  shall then have to prefer them; and the impediment most
  proﬁtably removed, without the which there were no                                      270
  expectation of our prosperity.
roderigo I will do this, if you can bring it to any
  opportunity.
iago I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I
  must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.                                            275
roderigo Adieu.                                           Exit
iago
  That Cassio loves her, I do well believe’t;
256 the command] f; your command q1; command q2 260 course] f, q2; cause q1
263–4 haply] q; happely f with his truncheon] q; not in f 267 taste] f, q2; trust q1
again] f (againe); again’t q 270 the which] f; which q 272 if you] f; if I q

   address, and although be ruled need only       264 truncheon ofﬁcer’s baton
   mean ‘take my advice’, a sly irony in          266–7 whose . . . taste who will only be
   his speech highlights the transformation          properly appeased
   in their power-relations that bringing         267 displanting uprooting, supplanting
   Roderigo to Cyprus has brought about.          269 prefer advance
                                                  271 prosperity success; but (as with ‘pro-
256–7 For . . . you This could mean either           ﬁtably’, l. 270) in the context of Iago’s
   ‘As for taking the lead (in our joint             ﬁnancial exploitation of Roderigo an
   action), I’ll leave it to you’ (Honigmann);       ironic play on the commercial sense of the
   or ‘I’ll arrange for you to be appointed,         word is probably present.
   given orders’ (Bevington); or ‘I’ll give you   272–3 bring . . . opportunity create an
   the orders’. The ambiguity is no doubt            opportunity (for me)
   calculated.                                    274 I warrant thee I assure you; you can
259 tainting impugning; sullying                     depend on it (a colloquial phrase, equiva-
   discipline military skill and experience          lent to ‘you bet’ or ‘sure thing’)
261 minister furnish, provide                        by and by The original meaning of
263 sudden in choler Either ‘impetuous               ‘immediately’ was still current, but the
   when roused to anger’, or ‘quick to               present-day sense of ‘in due course, after
   anger’.                                           a while’ was also well established
   haply perhaps                                  275 his necessaries i.e. Othello’s luggage

                                              257
2.1                            Othello, the Moor of Venice

   That she loves him, ‘tis apt and of great credit.
   The Moor (howbeit that I endure him not)
   Is of a constant, loving, noble nature;                                                     280
   And I dare think he’ll prove to Desdemona
   A most dear husband. Now I do love her too,
   Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
   I stand accountant for as great a sin)
   But partly led to diet my revenge,                                                          285
   For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
   Hath leapt into my seat—the thought whereof
   Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards;
   And nothing can or shall content my soul
   Till I am evened with him, wife for wife;                                                   290
   Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
   At least into a jealousy so strong
   That judgement cannot cure—which thing to do,
   If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace
   For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,                                                295
280 loving, noble] f; noble, louing q 284 accountant] f (accomptant), q] 285 led] f, q
(lead) 286 lusty] f; lustfull q 289 or] f; nor q 290 evened] f (eeuen’d), q2; euen
q1 for wife] q; for wift f 294 trace] f, q2; crush q1; trash steevens, honigmann and many
editors

278 apt . . . credit ﬁtted to the facts and            residence or ‘place’; (c) saddle (suggest-
   entirely credible                                   ing, with ‘leapt’, the common equestrian
279–82 The          Moor . . . husband        Cf.      metaphor for sex); (d) vulva. Adelman
   Giraldi, App. C, p. 438.                            suggests that the bawdy meaning is capa-
282 dear (a) beloved, cherished; (b) expen-            ble (like some other passages in the play)
   sive (i.e. she’ll pay dearly for her choice)        of a homosexual construction, so that it is
   Now . . . love her Cf. Giraldi, App. C,             as if Iago’s own body is violated by the
   p. 438.                                             Moor’s adultery (p. 129).
283 peradventure Either ‘as it happens’ or          288 mineral Cf. 1.2.74.
   ‘it may be the case that’.                       290 wife for wife Honigmann compares
284 accountant accountable. Iago prob-                 Exodus 21: 23–4, the so-called lex talionis
   ably has in mind the ﬁnal ‘account’ of the          (law of revenge): ‘and if any mischief fol-
   Last Judgement (OED, account, n. 8b), but           low, then thou shalt give life for life, eye
   the word inevitably resonates with Iago’s           for eye, tooth for tooth’.
   commercial language, and cf. his descrip-        294 trash worthless person
   tion of Cassio as a ‘counter-caster’             294–5 trace . . . hunting track, in order to
   (1.1.30).                                           proﬁt from his energetic pursuit (of Des-
285 diet feed                                          demona); Steevens may have been right
286 lusty (a) lustful; (b) vigorous, (sexually)        to conjecture that the original reading
   energetic                                           was the punning ‘trash’ (= control with a
287 leapt mounted sexually (Williams,                  leash) which seems to ﬁt the hunting
   Glossary, p. 184, Dictionary, pp. 791–3:            metaphor more neatly. Misreading would
   ‘used originally of farm quadrupeds’)               then readily account for Q’s crush, and
   seat (a) chair set apart for someone in             perhaps also for trace (often spelt ‘trase’).
   authority (standing for here Iago’s              295 putting on Perhaps combining ‘laying
   domestic place as master of his own                 on the scent’ (OED, put, v.1 47 l (a)) with
   household); (b) by extension, a man’s               ‘urging on’ (OED, put, v.1 47 h).

                                                258
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  2.2

   I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
   Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
   (For I fear Cassio with my nightcap too),
   Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
   For making him egregiously an ass                                                       300
   And practising upon his peace and quiet
   Even to madness. ’Tis here, but yet confused:
   Knavery’s plain face is never seen till used.  Exit

2.2 Enter Othello’s herald with a proclamation
herald (reads) ‘It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and
  valiant general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived,
  importing the mere perdition of the Turkish ﬂeet, every
  man put himself into triumph: some to dance, some to
  make bonﬁres, each man to what sport and revels his                                         5
  addiction leads him; for, besides these beneﬁcial news,
  it is the celebration of his nuptial.’—So much was his
  pleasure should be proclaimed. All ofﬁces are open and
  there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of

297 rank] q; right f 298 nightcap] q; Night-Cape f
   2.2] f (Scena Secunda); not in q 0.1 Othello’s herald with] f; a Gentleman reading q 1 her-
ald] f; not in q reads] after q (‘reading’, l. 0.1); not in f 3 every] f; that euery q 4–5 to
make] f; make q 6 addiction] q2; addition f; minde q1 7 nuptial] f; Nuptialls q 9 of
feasting] f; not in q


296 on the hip ready to give him a                   social resentments of the speech (cf. seat,
   decisive fall (a wrestling term). Cf. Dent        l. 287).
   H474.                                          301 practising upon plotting against
297 rank gross, offensive; corrupt;               302 here i.e. in his head. An implied stage
   lascivious.                                       direction.
   garb manner                                    303 plain Iago equivocates ironically be-
298 nightcap Bawdy metonym for ‘wife’. It            tween ‘frank, candid’ and ‘undisguised,
   is difﬁcult to know if F’s Night-Cape repre-      true’.
   sents a genuine variant or not, since cape     2.2.2 upon because of, in response to
   could be a variant spelling for cap (which        certain sure, reliable
   in any case has the same etymological ori-      3 importing concerning
   gin). OED gives night-cape as an expres-          mere perdition absolute destruction
   sion for ‘wife’ (night, n. 14) but without      4 put . . . triumph prepare himself for
   citing any examples. It is easy to see how a      public celebration
   wife might be described as a ‘night-cape’       6 addiction inclination. While F’s ‘addi-
   in which a man wraps himself for                  tion’ (= rank) is possible, Q’s ‘mind’
   warmth; on the other hand, as Williams            (= wish), makes it likely that the Q2 emen-
   shows (Dictionary, pp. 201–2), the vaginal        dation was well founded.
   associations of caps and hats were well         8 ofﬁces rooms in a house, castle, or palace
   established. Since cap can also be a ‘cap of      devoted to domestic services: e.g. kit-
   maintenance’ or ‘cap of ofﬁce’ (OED n.            chens, pantries, butteries, cellars, etc.
   4g) the Q reading ﬁts more neatly with the        (OED n. 9a).

                                              259
2.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

   ﬁve till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of                             10
   Cyprus and our noble general, Othello!                 Exit

2.3 Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and attendants
othello
  Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
  Let’s teach ourselves that honourable stop
  Not to out-sport discretion.
cassio
  Iago hath direction what to do;
  But notwithstanding, with my personal eye                                                  5
  Will I look to’t.
othello            Iago is most honest.
  Michael, goodnight. Tomorrow with your earliest,
  Let me have speech with you.—Come, my dear love,
  The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue:
  That proﬁt’s yet to come ’tween me and you.                                               10
  Good night.                           Exeunt all but Cassio
        Enter Iago
cassio
  Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
iago Not this hour, lieutenant: ’tis not yet ten o’th’ clock.
  Our general cast us thus early for the love of his
  Desdemona—who let us not therefore blame: he hath                                         15
  not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport
  for Jove.
cassio She’s a most exquisite lady.
10 have] f; hath q Heaven bless] q; Blesse f 11 Exit] f; not in q
  2.3] capell (after theobald, ‘The Castle’); not marked in f, q 0.1 Enter . . . attendants] f;
Enter Othello, Cassio, and Desdemona. q 2 that] f, q2; the q1 4 direction] f, q2; directed
q1 10 That] f, q2; The q1 ’tween] f; twixt q 11 Exeunt . . . Cassio] This edition (after q,
‘Exit Othello and Desdemona.’); Exit. f 13 o’th’ clock] f; aclock q
10 told Presumably = ‘counted’, but also a       13 Not this hour not for an hour yet
   possible spelling for ‘tolled’.               14 cast dismissed (OED v. 27)
2.3.2 stop restraint                             16 made . . . night Usually understood to
 3 out-sport carry revelry beyond the               mean ‘taken her virginity’, but Iago
   bounds of. The only use of this apparent         might mean only that Othello and
   coinage cited in OED.                            Desdemona have not yet shared a whole
 7 with your earliest at your earliest              night of pleasure.
   convenience                                      sport Cf. 2.1.222.
 9 purchase . . . ensue Usually taken to         17 Jove Classical mythology is full of stories
   indicate that the marriage has not yet           of Jupiter’s amours with mortal
   been consummated (cf. l. 16); but it might       women.
   refer more generally to the fulﬁlment of      18 exquisite of consummate excellence and
   their love.                                      beauty. The suavely accomplished Cassio

                                            260
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                               2.3

iago And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.
cassio Indeed she’s a most fresh and delicate creature.                                  20
iago What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to
  provocation.
cassio An inviting eye—and yet methinks right modest.
iago And when she speaks, is’t not an alarum to love?
cassio She is indeed perfection.                                                         25
iago Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I
  have a stoup of wine, and near without are a brace of
  Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the
  health of black Othello.
cassio Not tonight, good Iago: I have very poor and un-                                  30
  happy brains for drinking. I could well wish courtesy
  would invent some other custom of entertainment.
iago O, they are our friends! But one cup—I’ll drink for
  you.
cassio I have drunk but one cup tonight—and that was                                     35
  craftily qualiﬁed too—and behold what innovation it
  makes here. I am infortunate in the inﬁrmity, and dare
  not task my weakness with any more.
iago What, man? ’Tis a night of revels; the gallants desire
  it.                                                                                    40
cassio Where are they?
iago
  Here at the door. I pray you call them in.
cassio I’ll do’t, but it dislikes me.                   Exit

21 to] f; of q 24 is’t not an alarum] f (Is it); tis an alarme q 25 She] f, q2; It q1
27 near] f (neere); heere q 29 black] f; the blacke q 35 have] f; ha q 37 infortunate]
f; vnfortunate q


   tries to deﬂect the bawdy suggestiveness of      brace pair
   Iago’s praise.                                28–9 would . . . health want a measure [of
                                                    wine] to toast the health
19 game amorous sport. Cf. also ‘daughters       30–1 I . . . drinking I have a bad head for
   of the game’ = prostitutes (Troilus,             liquor (unhappy = unfortunate)
   4.6.64).                                      32 entertainment amusement, recreation;
21–2 sounds . . . provocation            Like       hospitality
   ‘alarum’ (l. 22) this metaphor draws on       36 qualiﬁed diluted
   the familiar erotic vocabulary of warfare:       innovation         revolution,    topsy-
   Desdemona’s eye is like a trumpet sum-           turveydom
   moning sexual excitement (provocation) to     37 here Cf. 2.1.302.
   discuss terms for surrender.                  38 task test
24 alarum call to arms                           43 dislikes me makes me unhappy
27 stoup tankard or ﬂagon

                                             261
2.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago
  If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
  With that which he hath drunk tonight already,                                          45
  He’ll be as full of quarrel and offence
  As my young mistress’ dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo,
  Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,
  To Desdemona hath tonight caroused
  Potations pottle-deep; and he’s to watch.                                               50
  Three else of Cyprus—noble, swelling spirits
  That hold their honours in a wary distance,
  The very elements of this warlike isle—
  Have I tonight ﬂustered with ﬂowing cups,
  And they watch too. Now ’mongst this ﬂock of
        drunkards                                                                         55
  Am I to put our Cassio in some action
  That may offend the isle. But here they come.
        Enter Cassio, Montano, and Gentlemen
  If consequence do but approve my dream,
  My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
cassio
  Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.                                           60
montano
  Good faith, a little one—not past a pint,
  As I am a soldier!
iago                  Some wine, ho!
  (Sings)        And let me the cannikin clink, clink,
                 And let me the cannikin clink.
48 hath] f; has q out] f; outward q 50 watch. | Three] f; watchŸ | ~ q1; watch: | ~ q2
51 else] f; lads q 52 honours] f; honour q 55 they watch] f; the watch q 56 Am I] f; I
am q to put] q; put to f 57.1 Enter . . . Gentlemen] f; Enter Montanio, Cassio, and others. q
(after ‘isle’, l. 57) 60 God] q; heauen f 63 Sings] rowe; not in f, q 63–7 And . . . drink]
in italic f, q 64 clink] f; clinke, clinke q
44 fasten . . . upon force . . . upon            56 put . . . action push our friend Cassio
46 full . . . offence ready to quarrel or take      into some ﬁght
   offence                                       58 If . . . dream if the outcome only proves
50 pottle half-gallon (2.25 litre) container        my hopes true
51 Three else three other men                    59 My . . . stream Cf. Dent W429, ‘Sail
   swelling proud, haughty, arrogant                with the wind and tide’.
52 hold . . . distance are careful to keep       60 rouse full draught of liquor
   their honour out of reach (of potential       63–7 And . . . drink Probably a popular
   slanderers), i.e. would be quick to take         drinking song: Hart cites fragments of a
   offence                                          number of similar ditties. For possible
53 elements essential components; i.e.              musical settings, see App. D (ii).
   ‘exactly the sort of characters who make      63 cannikin a drinking vessel (diminutive of
   this island the warlike place it is’.            can)

                                             262
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.3

                   A soldier’s a man;                                                         65
                   O, man’s life’s but a span—
                Why then let a soldier drink.
  Some wine, boys!
cassio              Fore God, an excellent song!
iago I learned it in England, where indeed they are most
  potent in potting. Your Dane, your German, and your                                         70
  swag-bellied Hollander—drink, ho!—are nothing to
  your English.
cassio Is your Englishman so exquisite in his drinking?
iago Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead
  drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he                                           75
  gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be
  ﬁlled.
cassio To the health of our general!
montano I am for it, lieutenant; and I’ll do you justice.
iago O sweet England!                                                                         80
  (Sings)       King Stephen was and a worthy peer,
                   His breeches cost him but a crown,
66 O, man’s] f; a q 68 God] q1; Heauen f, q2 73 Englishman] q; Englishmen f exquis-
ite] f, q2; expert q1 81 Sings] rowe; not in f, q 81–8 King . . . thee] in italic f, q1 (except
l. 81), q2 81 and a] f, q2; a q1

66 man’s . . . span Proverbial (Dent L251)       75 Almain German
   from Psalms 39: 6, ‘thou hast made my         81–8 King . . . thee Adapted from stanza 7
   days as it were a span long’. Span = very        of the ballad variously called ‘Bell my
   short time (lit. the span of a hand).            wife’ or ‘Take thy old cloak about thee’,
69–76 England . . . Hollander A nudging             ﬁrst printed in Percy’s Reliques of Old
   in-joke directed at the audience. For the        English Poetry (1765), ii. 7, but already
   stereotype of Danish drunkenness, see            paraphrased in Robert Greene’s attack on
   Hamlet Add. Pass. B.1–6 (1.4.19–24).             courtly ambition and extravagance, A
   Germans and Dutch were also prover-              quip for an upstart courtier (1592), sig. C3v.
   bially heavy drinkers, as were the English       The ballad consists of an argument
   (‘The Dutchman drinks his buttons off,           between a yeoman, who wants to aban-
   the English doublet and all away’, Tilley        don his farm to become a courtier, and his
   D655; G86, ‘The German drinks away his           wife (the speaker of this stanza), who
   sorrow . . .’; and cf. D656); though, as         mocks his pride. The extravagant cost of
   Sanders points out, English drunkenness          ambitious dressing above one’s station
   was often blamed on ‘the bad habits              (which the sumptuary laws passed by
   brought back by soldiers returning from          successive Tudor monarchs vainly sought
   the wars in the Netherlands’.                    to curb) is a recurrent theme of 16th- and
70 potting drinking                                 17th-century satire; here it may be used
71 swag-bellied having a great swaying              to reﬂect Iago’s resentment of the courtly
   paunch                                           Cassio. See App. D (ii) for possible settings
73 exquisite accomplished; but probably             and sources.
   also with the additional ironic sense of      81 and Sometimes introduced as a meaning-
   ‘dainty’ or ‘reﬁned’                             less extra syllable to ﬁll out the metre; cf.
74 drinks you Ethic dative (see 1.1.49), here       Twelfth Night, 5.1.385, ‘When that I was
   equivalent to ‘let me tell you’.                 and a little tiny boy’.

                                            263
2.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

                 He held them sixpence all too dear,
                   With that he called the tailor lown.
                 He was a wight of high renown,                                             85
                   And thou art but of low degree:
                 ’Tis pride that pulls the country down,
                   Then take thy old cloak about thee.
  Some wine, ho!
cassio ’Fore God, this is a more exquisite song than the                                   90
  other!
iago Will you hear’t again?
cassio No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place
  that does those things. Well, God’s above all, and there
  be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be                                    95
  saved.
iago It’s true, good lieutenant.
cassio For mine own part—no offence to the general, nor
  any man of quality—I hope to be saved.
iago And so do I too, lieutenant.                                                         100
cassio Ay; but, by your leave, not before me: the lieutenant
  is to be saved before the ensign. Let’s have no more of
  this: let’s to our affairs. God forgive us our sins!
  Gentlemen, let’s look to our business. Do not think,
  gentlemen, I am drunk: this is my ensign; this is my right                              105
  hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now: I can
  stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
gentlemen Excellent well.

88 Then] q; And f thy] f; thine q old] q2 (auld); awl’d f; owd q1 90 ’Fore God] q1;
Why f, q2 93 to be] f; not in q 94 God’s] q1; heau’ns f, q2 (Heauen’s) 95 must] f; that
must q 95–6 and . . . not be saved] f; not in q 100 too] f; not in q 103 God] q1; not in f,
q2 106 left] f; left hand q 107 I speak] f; speake q 108 gentlemen] f (Gent.); All. q


84 lown Alternative spelling of the more         94 does those things Cassio may be refer-
   common loon = idler, rogue, base fellow;         ring to the vices of conspicuous consump-
   since both forms are now obsolete, there         tion satirized in the song, or to the
   seems no point in disturbing the rhyme           unseemliness of drunken singing whilst
   for a confusing semi-modernization.              on watch; but he is probably too drunk to
90 exquisite Cassio’s drunkenness is reﬂec-         know quite what he means.
   ted in his clumsily obsessive repetition of      God’s above all Proverbial (Dent H348).
   this adjective.                               101 not before me Arguments about prece-
93–7 place . . . lieutenant         Ironically      dence were frequent causes of duelling in
   Cassio hits precisely on the motive of           this period. Cassio becomes irrationally
   Iago’s plot to prove him unworthy of his         heated and aggressive at this point, before
   place (rank), so Iago’s ‘good lieutenant’        checking himself on ‘Let’s have no more
   will be heavily loaded.                          of this.’

                                             264
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                               2.3

cassio Why, very well then—you must not think, then,
  that I am drunk.                                        Exit                           110
montano
  To th’ platform, masters, come; let’s set the watch.
iago
  You see this fellow that is gone before?
  He’s a soldier ﬁt to stand by Caesar
  And give direction; and do but see his vice—
  ’Tis to his virtue a just equinox,                                                     115
  The one as long as th’other. ’Tis pity of him:
  I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
  On some odd time of his inﬁrmity,
  Will shake this island.
montano                    But is he often thus?
iago
  ’Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:                                              120
  He’ll watch the horologe a double set
  If drink rock not his cradle.
montano                          It were well
  The general were put in mind of it.
  Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
  Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,                                              125
  And looks not on his evils: is not this true?
        Enter Roderigo
iago (aside to Roderigo)
  How now, Roderigo?
  I pray you, after the lieutenant go.           Exit Roderigo
109 Why] f, q2; not in q1 think, then] f, q2; thinke q1 117 puts] f; put q 120 the] q;
his f 125 Prizes the virtue] f; Praises the vertues q1; Praises the vertue q2 126 looks] f
(lookes), q2; looke q1 126.1 Enter Roderigo] f; after ‘How now Roderigo’ (l. 127) q 128 Exit
Roderigo] q; not in f

111 platform i.e. gun-platform                    118 On . . . inﬁrmity at some unpre-
   set the watch mount guard                         dictable moment when he is overcome by
113 ﬁt . . . Caesar worthy to be ranked with         his weakness
   Caesar; or, to stand alongside him as his      121 He’ll . . . set stay awake for two com-
   second-in-command                                 plete revolutions of the clock
115 just equinox exact and equal                  127 aside to Roderigo Capell’s suggested
   counterpart                                       direction is almost certainly correct,
117 trust . . . puts The Q reading (put) is          since the success of Iago’s explanation
   attractive here, since it appears to make         of the brawl to Othello (ll. 216–37)
   Iago refer speciﬁcally to the disputed lieu-      depends on Montano’s being ignorant
   tenancy (trust = ofﬁce, position of trust;        of the ensign’s manipulation of
   OED n. 5d), rather than to a more general         Roderigo.
   conﬁdence in his subordinate.

                                              265
2.3                             Othello, the Moor of Venice

montano
  And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor
  Should hazard such a place as his own second                                                 130
  With one of an ingraft inﬁrmity:
  It were an honest action to say so
  To the Moor.
iago            Not I, for this fair island!
  I do love Cassio well, and would do much
  To cure him of this evil—
        Voices within cry ‘Help! Help!’
                               But hark, what noise?                                           135
        Enter Cassio driving in Roderigo
cassio ’Swounds, you rogue, you rascal!
montano What’s the matter, lieutenant?
cassio A knave teach me my duty? I’ll beat the knave into a
  twiggen bottle!
roderigo Beat me?                                                                              140
cassio Dost thou prate, rogue?
montano Nay, good lieutenant! I pray you, sir, hold your
  hand.
cassio Let me go, sir, or I’ll knock you o’er the mazard.
montano Come, come, you’re drunk.                                                              145
cassio Drunk?

133 Not] f, q2; Nor q1 135 Voices . . . Help!] q (‘Helpe, helpe, within.’ after ‘doe much’); not in
f 135.1 driving in] q; pursuing f 136 ’Swounds] q1 (Zouns); not in f, q2 138 duty? I’ll] f;
duty: but I’le q 139 twiggen] f; wicker q 142 Nay] f; not in q I pray you] f; pray q


130 such . . . second such an (important)               pest 5.1.258.1 (‘Enter Ariel, driving in
   ofﬁce as that of his own deputy. Underly-            Caliban’); but the formula occurs out-
   ing Montano’s concern is the fact that               side Shakespeare, as McMillin points out
   military manuals of the time identiﬁed               (Q, p. 13).
   the lieutenant as a ‘friendly mediator to         138 beat the knave Honigmann notes that
   the captain for the inferior ofﬁcers’ and            such beatings, administered to servants
   laid particular stress on his duty of ‘paciﬁ-        and other social inferiors (cf. knave), were
   cation of discords and difference among              a stock comic routine.
   the soldiers’ (Stratioticos, sig. P1v ; Davies,   139 twiggen bottle bundle of twigs or
   Art of War, sig. N4).                                wicker (OED, bottle, n.3), i.e. Cassio will
131 ingraft engrafted, ingrained                        smash him to pieces; or perhaps (as
132 honest commendable. Iago’s shocked                  Ridley et al. suggest) a wicker-covered
   response implies his allegiance to a higher          ﬂask, like a chianti bottle, in reference to
   kind of ‘honesty’.                                   the stripes on his back.
135.1 driving in Honigmann argues that               144 mazard mazer or drinking-bowl; but
   the unusual wording of the Q direction               jocularly applied (as in Hamlet, 5.1.87) to
   indicates its authorial provenance: cf. 1            the head (perhaps in reference to the
   Henry VI, 1.7.0.1–2 (‘Enter Joan . . . dri-          pagan custom of using skulls for this
   ving Englishmen before her’) and Tem-                purpose).

                                                 266
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.3

       They ﬁght
iago (aside to Roderigo)
  Away, I say! Go out and cry ‘a mutiny!’        Exit Roderigo
  Nay, good lieutenant! God’s will, gentlemen!
  Help, ho! Lieutenant! Sir Montano! Sir!
       Montano is wounded
  Help, masters! Here’s a goodly watch indeed!                                               150
       A bell rings
  Who’s that which rings the bell? Diablo!—Ho!
  The town will rise. God’s will, lieutenant, hold!
  You’ll be ashamed for ever!
       Enter Othello, and attendants with weapons
othello What is the matter here?
montano ’Swounds, I bleed still!                                                             155
  I am hurt to th’ death.
  (Lunging at Cassio)     He dies!
othello                            Hold, for your lives!
iago
  Hold, ho! Lieutenant! Sir Montano! Gentlemen!
146.1 They ﬁght] q; not in f 147 Exit Roderigo] q2; not in f, q1 148 God’s will] q; Alas f
149 Lieutenant! Sir Montano! Sir!] q1 (Leiutenant: Sir Montanio, sir,); Lieutenant. Sir Mon-
tano: f; Leiutenant: Sir, Montanio, sir, q2; Lieutenant, sir! Montano, sir! sanders; Lieu-
tenant! sir—Montano—sir—honigmann 149.1 Montano is wounded] This edition; not in f, q
150.1 A bell rings] q2; ‘A bell rung.’ after ‘mutiny’ q1; not in f 151 which] f; that q 152
God’s . . . hold] q1; Fie, ﬁe, Lieutenant f; ﬁe, ﬁe, Leiutenant, hold q2 153 You’ll be ashamed]
f; You will be sham’d q 153.1 Enter . . . attendants] f; Enter . . . Gentlemen. q          with
weapons] q; not in f 155 ’Swounds] q1 (Zouns); not in f, q2 156 Lunging at Cassio] capell
(subs.); not in f, q He dies] f; not in q1; he faints. q2 (as stage direction)

147 mutiny riot; revolt against authority            tion he faints. Rizvi argues that the words
150.1 bell Church bells were customarily             are indeed a stage direction, but that they
   rung as a public alarm.                           represent a false start which Shakespeare
151 Diablo devil (Spanish). It is interesting        intended to cancel (p. 339). However (as
   that Iago, with his Spanish name, is the          Honigmann points out), the words can be
   only character in Shakespeare to use this         made to ﬁt the metre even if the Q oath is
   oath.                                             restored, and if they are taken to signal a
152 rise i.e. in rebellion; riot                     fresh attack on Cassio, they motivate
153–6 You’ll . . . lives This edition assumes        Othello’s and Iago’s hasty interventions
   that He dies was inadvertently omitted            in the following lines in a way that Q fails
   from 154 in Q (which would explain its            to do. This edition treats l. 154 as amphibi-
   ending in a colon). It may be, of course,         ous, rather than as completing 153 (as
   that Malone was correct in supposing              Malone’s conjecture would suggest).
   that these words were simply added to F in     153 ashamed Here, evidently, meaning
   order to compensate metrically for the            ‘exposed to shame’ as well as ‘ﬁlled with
   removal of Q’s Zouns; and they seem to            shame’.
   have puzzled the editor of Q2, who having      157 Sir Montano The F and Q punctuation
   apparently interpreted them as a stage            suggests Iago uses ‘Sir Montano’ as a
   direction, but observing that Montano             respectful mode of address, equivalent to
   does not in fact die, substituted the direc-      Italian ‘Ser Montano’.

                                              267
2.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?
  Hold! The general speaks to you: hold, for shame!
othello
  Why, how now! Ho! From whence ariseth this?                                            160
  Are we turned Turks, and to ourselves do that
  Which Heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
  For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl!
  He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
  Holds his soul light: he dies upon his motion.                                         165
  Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the isle
  From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
  Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
  Speak: who began this?—On thy love I charge thee!
iago
  I do not know. Friends all, but now, even now,                                         170
  In quarter and in terms like bride and groom
  Divesting them for bed; and then but now,

158 sense of place] hanmer; place of sense f, q 159 hold, for] f (hold for); hold, hold, for q
160 ariseth] f; arises q 162 hath] f; has q 163 For] f, q2; forth q1 164 for] f; to q



158 sense of place The F and Q reading              ironic. A similar irony invests barbarous
   ‘place of sense’ can be justiﬁed as mean-        with its echo of Iago’s ‘Barbary horse’
   ing either ‘dignity derived from ofﬁce’          (1.1.111)      and    ‘erring  barbarian’
   (Sanders), or ‘position of common sense          (1.3.348–9).
   and respect’ (Oxford), or as approxi-         161–2 that . . . Ottomites i.e. killing each
   mating to ‘the ordinary decencies’               other in the way that the heaven-sent
   (Riverside). However, the construction           storm has prevented the Turks from
   (though it seems to have presented no dif-       killing them. Lawrence Danson, however,
   ﬁculty to the Q2 editor) seems strained;         suggests a reference to the ‘widely
   and since (as Sanders concedes) inversion        known’ injunction in the Koran ‘against
   errors of this kind are not uncommon,            internecine strife amongst the faithful’;
   Hanmer’s emendation is persuasive (cf.           see his ‘England, Islam, and the
   4.2.54, scorn of time). Errors of this sort      Mediterranean World’, JEMCS 2 (2002),
   give support to the notion that a common         1–25 (pp. 11–12).
   manuscript lies somewhere behind Q and        164 carve . . . rage Othello literalizes the
   F (see App. B, pp. 413–14, 416 n. 3,             proverbial expression ‘To carve for
   422–3).                                          oneself’, meaning ‘to please (or help)
161–3 turned          Turks . . . barbarous         oneself’; he means ‘satisfy his personal
   Strictly speaking to turn Turk meant to          outrage by stabbing as he pleases’.
   convert to Islam; but in common               165 light of little account
   idiomatic usage (Dent T609) it could             upon his motion the instant he moves
   mean simply ‘betray’, ‘renege’ or (as         166 dreadful terrifying, ﬁlling with dread
   here) exhibit the barbarous behaviour         167 propriety proper or natural condition
   attributed to Turks. In the mouth of a           (of peace)
   Moor-turned-Christian who will himself        171 quarter relations with, or conduct
   metaphorically ‘turn Turk’ at the end of         towards another (OED n. 17a)
   the play (5.2.351–5) the phrase is clearly    172 Divesting them undressing

                                             268
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    2.3

  As if some planet had unwitted men,
  Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breasts
  In opposition bloody. I cannot speak                                                       175
  Any beginning to this peevish odds;
  And would in action glorious I had lost
  Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
othello
  How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
cassio
  I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.                                                      180
othello
  Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;
  The gravity and stillness of your youth
  The world hath noted; and your name is great
  In mouths of wisest censure. What’s the matter,
  That you unlace your reputation thus,                                                      185
  And spend your rich opinion for the name
  Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
montano
  Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger:
  Your ofﬁcer Iago can inform you—
  While I spare speech, which something now offends
        me—                                                                                  190
  Of all that I do know; nor know I aught
  By me that’s said or done amiss this night—
  Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
  And to defend ourselves it be a sin
174 breasts] f; breast q 178 Those] f, q2; These q1 179 comes . . . are] f; came . . . were
q 181 wont be] q; wont to be f 184 mouths] f, q2; men q1 193 sometimes] f; some-
time q

173 unwitted driven mad (only use cited in           strued as the opposite of the barbarous
   OED). According to astrological doctrine          there is a calculated irony in making the
   not only the moon but other planets were          man whom Iago has dismissed as an
   capable of an inﬂuence that could un-             ‘erring barbarian’ (1.3.348–9) the mouth-
   hinge the mind.                                   piece of civility (cf. ll. 161–3, and 4.1.59–
175 opposition combat                                60).
176 peevish foolish, mad; malignant;              182 stillness quietness of temper
   headstrong                                     184 censure judgement
   odds strife                                    185 unlace open the purse strings of
178 to . . . it to take part in it                186 spend . . . opinion squander the high
181 were wont be have always been                    esteem in which you are held
   civil well-behaved, civilized; i.e. exhibit-   190 something . . . me causes me some
   ing those qualities proper to citizens of a       pain at the moment
   well-ordered state. Since the civil is con-    193 self-charity care for oneself

                                              269
2.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  When violence assails us.
othello                       Now, by heaven,                                             195
  My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
  And passion, having my best judgement collied,
  Assays to lead the way. ’Swounds, if I stir,
  Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
  Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know                                                200
  How this foul rout began, who set it on,
  And he that is approved in this offence—
  Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth—
  Shall lose me. What, in a town of war
  Yet wild, the people’s hearts brim-full of fear,                                        205
  To manage private and domestic quarrel?
  In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
  ’Tis monstrous! Iago, who began’t?
montano
  If, partially afﬁned or leagued in ofﬁce,
  Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,                                              210

197 collied] f; coold q 198 ’Swounds . . . stir] q1 (Zouns); If I once stir f, q2 206 quarrel]
f; quarrels q 207 court and guard of] f, q; court of guard and theobald 208 began’t] f;
began q 209 partially] f; partiality q leagued] pope; league f, q

196 blood temper                                    matters (the word is etymologically
197 collied darkened, blackened (cf. ‘collied       related to French ménage = household).
   night’, Dream, 1.1.145); but punning on          domestic internal
   ‘choler’ (anger; or, one of the four          207 on . . . safety Court is presumably short
   humours of the body thought to produce           for ‘court of guard’, and the whole phrase
   feelings of anger). An early instance of a       means ‘here in the guard-house and dur-
   train of images whose cumulative effect          ing the very watch meant to secure the
   is to ‘racialize’ Othello’s impassioned          safety of the city’. Editors understandably
   behaviour. For the physiological basis of        ﬁnd Theobald’s transposition to ‘court of
   such blackening from the ﬁery heat of            guard and safety’ tempting in the light of
   ‘choler’, see Paster, and Floyd-Wilson,          2.1.212; it assumes a common error in
   pp. 36–41, 69–70, 78–86.                         the copy for F and Q, but a similar trans-
200 sink fall                                       position occurs in both texts at l. 158.
   rebuke violent blow (given in                    However, ‘and safety’ seems an unsatis-
   reproof)                                         factorily vague construction.
201 rout riot                                    208 monstrous The trisyllabic pronuncia-
202 approved in proved guilty of                    tion (monsterous) required by the metre
204 town of war garrison town (cf. Henry            will help to alert a modern audience to the
   V, 2.4.7)                                        stronger sense of the word, which means
205 wild violently excited, out of control,         not merely ‘outrageous’ but ‘unnatural’,
   chaotic. A kind of oxymoron is involved,         i.e. what one might expect of monsters,
   since wildness was a property of the             like those creatures who populate the
   uncivil world, the barbarous ‘wilderness’,       wilderness of Othello’s travel narrative
   beyond the margins of the urban polis.           (1.3.143–5).
206 manage conduct. A neat subdued quib-         209 partially . . . ofﬁce made partial [to
   ble is involved, since one could ‘manage’        Cassio] by any ties of afﬁnity or allied by
   (= wield) weapons as well as domestic            your military positions

                                            270
                           Othello, the Moor of Venice                               2.3

  Thou art no soldier.
iago                    Touch me not so near—
  I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
  Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio;
  Yet I persuade myself to speak the truth
  Shall nothing wrong him. This it is, general:                                      215
  Montano and myself being in speech,
  There comes a fellow crying out for help,
  And Cassio following with determined sword
  To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
  Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause;                                         220
  Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
  Lest by his clamour (as it so fell out)
  The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot,
  Outran my purpose; and I returned then, rather
  For that I heard the clink and fall of swords                                      225
  And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
  I ne’er might say before. When I came back—
  For this was brief—I found them close together
  At blow and thrust, even as again they were
  When you yourself did part them.                                                   230
  More of this matter cannot I report.
  But men are men: the best sometimes forget.
  Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
  As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
  Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received                                             235
  From him that ﬂed some strange indignity,

212 cut from] f; out from q1; out of q2 215 This] f; Thus q 218 following with] pope;
following him with f, q 224 then, rather] f (then rather); the rather q 226 oath] f, q2;
oaths q1 227 say] f, q2; see q1 231 cannot I] f; can I not q


211 Touch . . . near be careful not to       226 high loud
   wound my honour so intimately             230 When . . . them The short line marks a
218 following with F’s and Q’s him is both      dramatic pause for breath at the end of
   redundant and extra-metrical, so Pope        Iago’s narrative.
   was almost certainly right to assume it   232 men . . . forget Proverbial: see Dent
   had been accidentally imported from the      M541, and B316.1 (‘The best go astray’).
   following line.                           233 him Montano
219 execute use                              234 As . . . best Apparently not an actual
220 entreats his pause begs him to stop         proverb, but characteristic of the senten-
222 as . . . out as did indeed happen           tious way of speaking by which ‘honest’
224–5 rather . . . that all the sooner          Iago mimics the voice of common
   because                                      wisdom.

                                         271
2.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Which patience could not pass.
othello                            I know, Iago,
  Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
  Making it light to Cassio.—Cassio, I love thee;
  But never more be ofﬁcer of mine.                                                        240
        Enter Desdemona attended
  Look if my gentle love be not raised up!
  I’ll make thee an example.
desdemona
  What is the matter, dear?
othello                      All’s well now, sweeting:
  Come away to bed. (To Montano) Sir, for your hurts
  Myself will be your surgeon. Lead him off.                                               245
                                            Montano is led off
  Iago, look with care about the town,
  And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.
  Come, Desdemona: ’tis the soldier’s life
  To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
                                Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio
iago What, are you hurt, lieutenant?                                                       250
cassio Ay, past all surgery.
iago Marry, God forbid!
cassio Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost
  my reputation. I have lost the immortal part of myself,
  and what remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my                                     255
  reputation!
240.1 Enter . . . attended] f; Enter Desdemona, with others. q 243 dear] f; not in q now]
q; not in f 245 Lead him off] f, q; as stage direction malone conj. 245.1 Montano . . . off]
capell; not in f, q 249.1 Exeunt . . . Cassio] after q (‘Exit Moore, Desdemona, and attendants.’
after ‘Lieutenant’, l. 250); Exit. f 252 Marry, God] q1 (Mary); Marry Heauen f, q2 (Mary)
253 reputation! O] f (Reputation: Oh); not in q 254 part] f; part sir q

237 pass overlook                                    to suggest that reputation is his soul. Cf.
238 mince make light of. The phrase is               also Dent C817, ‘He that hath lost his
   proverbial (Dent M755).                           credit is dead to the world’. Stratioticos
239 Making . . . to Cassio making it                 places particular stress on the ideal lieu-
   appear of less importance so far as Cassio        tenant’s ‘credit’ and ‘reputation’ (sig.
   is concerned                                      P1), and, like the Art of War, emphasizes
240 But . . . mine Cf. Giraldi, App. C,              his role as conciliator: since (as Davies
   p. 439.                                           puts it) ‘particularly the paciﬁcation of
254–5 immortal . . . bestial The immortal            discords and difference among the sol-
   part would normally refer to the soul, the        diers . . . appertains unto him, which
   possession of which was supposed to dis-          must be done without choler or passion’;
   tinguish human beings from beasts:                he must ‘have special care that by his
   Cassio’s hyperbolic conceit plays with the        means no quarrels do grow . . . for fear of
   ancient idea of fame as immortal in order         banding and mutinies’ (Davies, sig. O1).

                                             272
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   2.3

iago As I am an honest man, I thought you had received
  some bodily wound; there is more of sense in that than
  in ‘reputation’. ‘Reputation’ is an idle and most false
  imposition, oft got without merit, and lost without                                      260
  deserving. You have lost no reputation at all, unless you
  repute yourself such a loser. What, man! there are more
  ways to recover the general again. You are but now cast in
  his mood—a punishment more in policy than in malice,
  even so as one would beat his offenceless dog to affright an                             265
  imperious lion. Sue to him again and he’s yours.
cassio I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so
  good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so
  indiscreet an ofﬁcer. Drunk, and speak parrot, and
  squabble? Swagger, swear, and discourse fustian with                                     270
  one’s own shadow? O, thou invisible spirit of wine, if
  thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!
iago What was he that you followed with your sword?
  What had he done to you?
cassio I know not.                                                                         275
257 thought] q; had thought f 258 of sense] cambridge 1891; sense f; offence
q 262–3 more ways] f; wayes q 268 slight] f; light q                and so] f; and q
269–71 Drunk . . . shadow] f, q2; not in q1 271 invisible] f, q; enticeable kellner conj.;
invincible theobald 1740
258 sense feeling, physical sensation.              the dog before the lion’; under normal
   Sanders may be right to suggest that the         circumstances Cassio would ﬁnd the
   Q’s offence represents a misreading of           analogy profoundly insulting. ‘Imperious
   manuscript ‘of sense’ with a long initial        lion’ may recall the fact that a winged lion
   s; but it could also be accounted for as a       was the heraldic badge of the Venetian
   mishearing. In any case, F’s sense is per-       empire.
   fectly comprehensible on its own, and         265 offenceless Earliest citation in OED.
   there is no need to substitute the conjec-    269–71      Drunk . . . shadow Probably
   tural reading.                                   omitted by the Q compositor in order to
260 imposition Perhaps, as editors                  make space at the bottom of the page,
   generally assume, ‘something imposed             when setting by formes. Cf. also
   by others’; but the sense seems to be clos-      4.1.169–71.
   er to ‘imposture’ or ‘cheat’, signiﬁcantly    269 parrot gibberish. Cf. Dent P60, ‘To
   predating the earliest recorded examples         speak like a parrot’.
   of this usage (OED n. 6).                        squabble First example cited in OED.
261–2 You . . . loser A quasi-proverbial         270 fustian inﬂated nonsense. Another
   piece of consolation: cf. 1.3.207–10, and        term, like bombast (see 1.1.12), borrowed
   Dent M254.                                       from the vocabulary of clothing: fustian
263 recover reconcile, win back to friend-          was originally a kind of coarse, heavy
   ship (OED n. 3b)                                 cloth made from cotton and linen.
   cast discarded; cashiered                     271 invisible The adjective seems oddly
263–4 in his mood because of his (tem-              redundant, spirits normally being invis-
   porary) burst of anger                           ible by deﬁnition. Perhaps the manuscript
264 in policy in a spirit of prudence or            read ‘intisable’ (i.e. ‘enticeable’ = en-
   expediency                                       ticing, seductive) as Kellner suggests, or
265–6 beat . . . lion Cf. Dent D443: ‘Beat          ‘invincible’, as Theobald proposed.

                                             273
2.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago Is’t possible?
cassio I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly
  —a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men
  should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their
  brains; that we should, with joy, pleasance, revel, and                                  280
  applause, transform ourselves into beasts!
iago Why, but you are now well enough: how came you
  thus recovered?
cassio It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place
  to the devil wrath; one unperfectness shows me another                                   285
  to make me frankly despise myself.
iago Come, you are too severe a moraller. As the time, the
  place, and the condition of this country stands, I could
  heartily wish this had not so befallen; but since it is as it
  is, mend it for your own good.                                                           290
cassio I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I
  am a drunkard. Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an
  answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by
  and by a fool, and presently a beast—O strange! Every
  inordinate cup is unblessed, and the ingredient is a                                     295
  devil.


278 God] q1; not in f, q2 280 pleasance, revel] f; Reuell, pleasure q 282 Why,] q; ~? f
288 and] f; not in q 289 not so] q; not f 294 O strange] f; not in q 295 inordinate] f,
q2; vnordinate q1 ingredient] f; ingredience q



276 Is’t possible This question will become          Othello himself will undergo as a result of
   a recurrent motif in the next two acts, as        his jealousy.
   though the play (in the sardonic voice         280 pleasance pleasure
   it sometimes shares with Iago) were            284–5 It . . . wrath Echoes Ephesians 4:
   confessing its own improbabilities and            26–7, ‘let not the sun go down upon your
   thereby pre-empting the audience’s                wrath, Neither give place to the devil’.
   incredulity. Cf. 3.3.360, 3.4.67, 4.1.40,      286 frankly unreservedly, abundantly
   4.2.87.                                        287 moraller moralizer (OED, citing only
279 enemy A standard euphemism for                   this example)
   ‘devil’, the literal meaning of Satan being    291–2 I will . . . drunkard A conditional
   ‘adversary’ (cf. l. 272).                         construction (‘If I ask . . . he’ll tell
280–1 that . . . beasts As Honigmann sug-            me . . .’).
   gests, the metamorphosis recalls the bes-      292 Hydra A many-headed monster in
   tial transformations of Circe’s island. This      Greek mythology (cf. Dent H278, ‘As
   episode from the Odyssey was reworked in          many heads as Hydra’).
   numerous Renaissance texts, including          293 stop close, silence
   the Bower of Bliss episode in Spenser’s        295 inordinate intemperate (perhaps with
   Faerie Queene (2.12.39–40, 84–7). Com-            a quibble on the religious meaning of
   pare the bestial metamorphosis that               ‘ordain’)

                                              274
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      2.3

iago Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature
  if it be well used: exclaim no more against it. And, good
  lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
cassio I have well approved it, sir—I drunk?                                                  300
iago You, or any man living, may be drunk at a time, man.
  I tell you what you shall do: our general’s wife is now the
  general. I may say so in this respect, for that he hath
  devoted and given up himself to the contemplation,
  mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. Confess                                        305
  yourself freely to her; importune her help to put you in
  your place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so
  blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness
  not to do more than she is requested. This broken joint
  between you and her husband entreat her to splinter.                                         310
301 a time, man] f; some time q1; some time, man q2 302 I] f; I’ll q 303 hath] f; has q
305 denotement] q2; deuotement f, q1 306 her help to] f; her she’ll q1; her, she’ll help to
q2 307 of so] f; so q 308 she holds] f; that she holds q 309 broken joint] f, q2; braule
q1

297 familiar friendly, sociable; but with a         would ﬁt with the religious sense of
   sardonic quibble on the ‘familiars’ or           contemplation, though less easily with
   ‘familiar creatures’ supposedly kept by          mark.
   witches, animals in which diabolic spirits       parts and graces accomplishments and
   were lodged.                                     physical charms
   creature created thing, invention; but        306–7 put . . . place reinstate you in your
   creature could be used to describe any kind      ofﬁce; but ‘place’ will develop an obscene
   of human sustenance, and was often               suggestiveness as the play goes on, and
   humorously applied to alcohol (OED n.            the ﬁrst hint of it may come here (see
   1c–d); the sense of ‘puppet, slave, toady’       Williams, Dictionary, p. 1048, Glossary,
   may also be present.                             p. 237; and Neill, ‘Places’, pp. 222–6).
300 approved proved                              307 free Cf. 1.3.261. It is signiﬁcant that this
301 at a time at some time, once in a               is a word that has been several times
   while                                            applied to Othello: twice by himself (see
302–3 our . . . general A quibbling sugges-         also 1.2.26) and once by Iago (1.3.388).
   tion that Desdemona has become ‘gener-           Here, in conjunction with ‘place . . .
   al’ property may underlie the gibe at            kind . . . apt . . . vice . . . do’, it probably
   Othello’s uxoriousness.                          has a bawdy sense (= sexually available;
303 for that because                                Williams, Dictionary, p. 542) to which
305 mark observation (OED n.1 20)                   Cassio is deaf.
   denotement noting (earliest citation in          kind Perhaps quibbling on the sense
   OED). One of Q2’s rare independent               ‘sexually complaisant’ (Williams, Dic-
   emendations: the editor appears to               tionary, p. 760).
   have noticed the infelicitous ‘deuoted           apt susceptible, easily persuaded; but
   . . . deuotement’ and assumed a misprint         also ‘apt for love; nubile and desirous’
   based either on misreading (n and u being        (Partridge, p. 59)
   almost indistinguishable in many early        309 do For the bawdy sense of this word, see
   modern hands) or a turned letter (as             Williams, Dictionary, pp. 395–8, Glossary,
   Theobald later argued); the guess is             pp. 101–2.
   probably correct, since denotement is         309–12 This . . . before Cf. Dent B515, ‘A
   suitably close in meaning to contemplation       broken bone is the stronger when it is well
   and mark; Q and F deuotement (= devotion)        set’.
   makes satisfactory sense, however, and        310 splinter apply a splint to

                                             275
2.3                             Othello, the Moor of Venice

  And—my fortunes against any lay worth naming!—this
  crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.
cassio You advise me well.
iago I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
cassio I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will                                         315
  beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I
  am desperate of my fortunes if they check me here.
iago You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant: I must to
  the watch.
cassio Good night, honest Iago.                          Exit                                       320
iago
  And what’s he then that says I play the villain,
  When this advice is free I give, and honest,
  Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
  To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy
  Th’inclining Desdemona to subdue                                                                  325
  In any honest suit. She’s framed as fruitful
  As the free elements; and then for her
  To win the Moor—were’t to renounce his baptism,
  All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin—
  His soul is so enfettered to her love                                                             330
  That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
  Even as her appetite shall play the god,

315 I will] f; will I q   317 here] q; not in f      328 were’t] q (wer’t); were f


311 lay bet, wager                                     323 Probal probable (ﬁrst use cited in OED)
311–12 this crack . . . stronger this frac-            325 inclining compliant; already pre-
   ture in your love will knit and make it                disposed
   stronger                                            326 honest (sexually) honourable
315 freely unreservedly                                326–7 framed . . . elements created as
316 undertake for me take up my cause                     generous and productive as the unfettered
316–17 I . . . check me I shall think my for-             natural order itself. The heavy alliteration
   tunes are quite hopeless if I am rebuffed.             on ‘framed . . . fruitful . . . free’ will make
321 play the villain Iago’s metatheatrical                it easy for an actor to bring out a bawdy
   jokiness recalls Richard III (cf. also l. 332).        innuendo.
322 free . . . and honest Iago continues to            329 seals tokens, signs, or symbols authen-
   play with various meanings of these key                ticating a covenant
   words: here free can mean either ‘free of           330 enfettered Earliest citation in OED.
   charge; generous, frank, spontaneous;               331 list wishes
   innocent, unbiased’, or any combination             332 her appetite his desire for her; but
   of these; honest, similarly, can mean                  perhaps equivocating on Desdemona’s
   ‘honourable; truthful, frank; or chaste’.              imputed desire for power over Othello.
   Like most of what Iago tells his other                 play the god The phrase suggests a
   gulls, Roderigo and Othello, Iago’s advice             disconcerting analogy with Iago’s
   is in one sense perfectly truthful, though             own propensity to ‘play the villain’ (l.
   its motives are scarcely honourable.                   321).

                                                  276
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  2.3

  With his weak function. How am I then a villain
  To counsel Cassio to this parallel course
  Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!                                                335
  When devils will the blackest sins put on,
  They do suggest at ﬁrst with heavenly shows,
  As I do now. For, whiles this honest fool
  Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
  And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,                                           340
  I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear:
  That she repeals him for her body’s lust;
  And by how much she strives to do him good
  She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
  So will I turn her virtue into pitch,                                                  345
  And out of her own goodness make the net
  That shall enmesh them all.
        Enter Roderigo
                                 How now, Roderigo?
roderigo I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound
  that hunts, but one that ﬁlls up the cry. My money
  is almost spent; I have been tonight exceedingly                                       350
  well cudgelled; and I think the issue will be, I shall
  have so much experience for my pains, and so, with

336 the] f; their q 338 whiles] f; while q1; whilst q2 339 fortune] f; fortunes q
347 enmesh] q; en-mash f 347.1 Enter Roderigo] q; after ‘now Roderigo’ f 351 and] f;
not in q 352 and so, with] f; as that comes to, and q1; and so no q2


333 function intellectual and moral powers      339 Plies importunes, works away at
   (OED, citing this as the ﬁrst example);      341 pestilence Literally ‘plague’; but here
   performance, activity; virility, potency        ‘poison’, since plague was sometimes
   (Partridge, p. 112). The word can also          thought to be the effect of mass poisoning
   mean ‘ofﬁce, calling, trade’ (cf. 4.2.27),      (e.g. of wells). Poisoning through the ear
   and so link to Iago’s suggestion that ‘our      (whether literal or metaphorical) is a per-
   general’s wife is now the general’.             sistent motif in Hamlet.
334 parallel i.e. to Iago’s plotting            342 repeals recalls (i.e. has him reinstated)
335 Divinity of hell Probably ‘hellish doc-     344 credit trust; reputation, esteem
   trine’; but an invocation of Satan as the    345 pitch i.e. black and foul. The stickiness
   god of Hell is also possible.                   of tar may also (as Ridley proposed) have
336–8 When . . . now Cf. Dent D231, ‘The           suggested birdlime, and so prompted the
   Devil can transform himself into an angel       image of the fowler’s net.
   of light’; D266, ‘The Devil sometimes        347 enmesh Earliest citation in OED.
   speaks the truth’; Tilley D310, ‘The white   349 cry pack. Here apparently ‘the hounds
   Devil is worse than the black’.                 that merely give tongue as they follow
336 put on advance; but perhaps also quib-         those who are really running the scent’
   bling on ‘assume, dress themselves in’,         (Ridley).
   and thus linked to ‘shows’.                  351–2 I shall . . . pains Cf. Dent L1, ‘He has
337 suggest tempt                                  his labor for his pains’.

                                            277
2.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  no money at all and a little more wit, return again to
  Venice.
iago
  How poor are they that have not patience!                                             355
  What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
  Thou know’st we work by wit and not by witchcraft,
  And wit depends on dilatory time.
  Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
  And thou by that small hurt hast cashiered Cassio.                                   360
  Though other things grow fair against the sun,
  Yet fruits that blossom ﬁrst will ﬁrst be ripe.
  Content thyself awhile. By th’ mass, ’tis morning:
  Pleasure and action make the hours seem short!
  Retire thee, go where thou art billeted.                                             365
  Away, I say! thou shalt know more hereafter—
  Nay, get thee gone!                             Exit Roderigo
                       Two things are to be done:
  My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress—
  I’ll set her on—
  Myself a while to draw the Moor apart                                                370
  And bring him jump when he may Cassio ﬁnd
  Soliciting his wife. Ay, that’s the way:
  Dull not device by coldness and delay.                   Exit

353 a little more] f; with that q1; with a little more q2 356 again] f; not in q 359 Does’t]
Dos’t f; Dos’t q hath] f; has q 360 hast] q; hath f 362 Yet] f, q2; But q1 363 By th’
mass] q; Introth f 367 Exit Roderigo] f; not in q Two] f; Some q 369–70 on. . . . to] q
(on. | My selfe awhile, to); on my selfe, a while, to f 373 Exit] f; Exeunt. q


353 wit common sense                           362 Yet . . . ripe    Another     piece    of
355 How . . . patience Cf. Dent P103, ‘He         apparently pseudo-proverbial wisdom;
   that has no patience has nothing’.             as Honigmann points out, the claim is not
356 What . . . degrees Although Tilley            even always true. The logic of Iago’s
   cites no exact equivalent, this apothegm       ‘Though . . . yet’ is perhaps deliberately
   sounds proverbial too. Cf. W929,               obscure, since he is bamboozling the
   ‘Though the wound be healed yet the            slow-witted Roderigo into believing,
   scar remains’.                                 despite his recent cudgelling, that every-
358 dilatory (a) tardy, prone to delay; (b)       thing is going well.
   expanding; (c) involving accusations or     364 Pleasure . . . short Proverbial; Dent
   the laying of information against some-        H747, ‘Hours of pleasure are short’.
   one. For a suggestive discussion of the     368 move plead
   range of meanings in this word, see         369 I’ll . . . on The short line indicates a
   Parker, ‘ “Dilation” ’. See also 3.1.127.      meditative pause.
360 cashiered Cassio The juxtaposition         371 jump exactly
   points up the latent pun in Cassio’s name   373 Dull . . . coldness don’t let my plots
   (see ‘Persons’).                               lose their impetus through lack of
361 against when fully exposed to                 enthusiasm

                                           278
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      3.1

3.1 Enter Cassio with Musicians
cassio
  Masters, play here—I will content your pains—
  Something that’s brief; and bid ‘Good morrow, general!’
       They play. Enter Clown
clown Why, masters, have your instruments been in
     Naples that they speak i’th’ nose thus?
boy musician How, sir? how?                                                                       5
clown Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
boy musician Ay, marry are they, sir.
clown O, thereby hangs a tail.
boy musician Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
clown Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know.                                        10

3.1] f (Actus Tertius. Scena Prima.), q2 (Actus 3. Scœna 1.); not in q1 0.1 Enter . . . musicians]
q2 (subs.); Enter Cassio, Musitians, and Clowne. f; Enter Cassio, with Musitians and the Clowne.
q1 2.1 They . . . Clown] q2 (subs.); not in f, q1 5, 7, 9, 14, 18 boy musician] This edition;
Mus. f; Boy. q 6 pray you,] f; pray, cald q


3.1 Shakespeare seems to have been obliged             probably also a reference to venereal dis-
    to include a part for the company’s resi-          ease [syphilis, known as ‘the Neapolitan
    dent clown in every play; but the two              disease’] which attacked the bridge of the
    scenes in Othello are unusually perfunc-           nose’ (Sanders). According to Parr (cited
    tory and are often omitted in performance          in Furness) ‘every Clown knew that
    (cf. 3.4.1–20). The function of this               Pulcinella [in commedia dell’arte and pup-
    episode, with its obscene badinage, is to          pet shows] is the Neapolitan mask, and
    taint Cassio’s serenade with something             that Pulcinella speaks through the nose’.
    of the quality of the ‘rough music’ with           It is possible that a bilingual pun may also
    which early modern communities                     be involved (‘nez pulls’) illustrated by the
    expressed their disapprobation of inap-            clown’s pulling his own nose (to make his
    propriate      weddings.     See    Bristol,       speech sound comically nasal), or pos-
    ‘Charivari’.                                       sibly tweaking the nose of his interlocu-
 1 content reward                                      tor. Shylock’s complaints about the
 2 Good morrow After the wedding night,                bagpipe that ‘sings i’th’ nose’ and ‘the vile
    songs and music were customarily per-              squealing of the wry-necked ﬁfe’ (Mer-
    formed outside the bridal chamber to               chant, 4.1.48, 2.5.30) offer a possible clue
    greet the dawn. Donne’s lyric ‘The Good-           as to the instruments envisaged here.
    Morrow’ is a sophisticated imitation of        5, 7, 9, 14, 18 BOY MUSICIAN Since the Q2
    this folk-ritual. See App. D (iii).                editor was at such pains to correct both
2.1 They . . . Clown It is so unusual for Q2           Q and F on the Clown’s entry, we can
    to make any changes to Q not based on F            perhaps assume that he saw Q’s Boy
    that this interpolated direction probably          as correct. The Clown’s crude bawdy
    preserves the editor’s recollection of what        will perhaps have sounded funnier
    he had seen on the stage; though he                when delivered to a naive (or faux naïf )
    might have deduced from the subsequent             child.
    dialogue that the Clown, rather than            8 thereby . . . tail The clown teases the
    being Cassio’s companion, is a member of           musician by punning on a proverbial
    Othello’s household who enters in                  phrase (Dent T48, ‘Thereby hangs a
    response to the noise of the serenade.             tale’); the ‘tail’ he has in mind is a penis.
 3 Naples . . . nose ‘The Clown may mean           10 wind instrument anus (sometimes
    that the music has an ugly nasal twang             referred to as the ars musica, according to
    like the Neapolitan accent, but there is           Partridge, pp. 219–20)

                                               279
3.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  But, masters, here’s money for you; and the general so
  likes your music that he desires you, for love’s sake, to
  make no more noise with it.
boy musician Well, sir, we will not.
clown If you have any music that may not be heard, to’t                                   15
  again—but (as they say) to hear music the general does
  not greatly care.
boy musician We have none such, sir.
clown Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll away.
  Go, vanish into air, away!                                                              20
                                               Exeunt Musicians
cassio Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?
clown No, I hear not your honest friend—I hear you.
cassio Prithee, keep up thy quillets—there’s a poor piece
  of gold for thee: if the gentlewoman that attends
  the general’s wife be stirring, tell her there’s one                                    25
  Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt thou do
  this?
clown She is stirring, sir: if she will stir hither, I shall seem
  to notify unto her.
cassio
  Do, my good friend.                                  Exit Clown
        Enter Iago
                      In happy time, Iago.                                                30

12 for love’s sake] f, q2; of all loues q1 19 up] f; not in q 20 into air] f, q2; not in q1
20.1 Exeunt Musicians] f (Exit Mu.); not in q 21 hear, mine] theobald; heare me, mine f;
heare my q 25 general’s wife] q; Generall f 30 cassio . . . friend] q; not in f Exit Clown]
q2 (after ‘Iago’); after ‘vnto her’ (l. 29) f; not in q1


12 for love’s sake ‘for the sake of any affec-      they carry their instruments; but pun-
   tion you may have for him—with a pun             ning on ‘bagpipe’, and perhaps with a
   on “for the sake of his erotic concentra-        quibble on ‘pipe’ = penis, and ‘bag’ =
   tion” ’ (Sanders)                                vagina (or scrotum).
13 noise Sanders suggests a pun on ‘nose’.       21 honest friend Perhaps a glance at
16–17 but . . . care ‘[A]s they say’ suggests       ‘honest Iago’.
   a punning reference to the artistic indif-    23 quillets quibbles
   ference of the general public (cf. ‘caviare   24 attends serves
   to the general’, Hamlet, 2.2.439–40).         28–9 She . . . her The Clown mocks
18 none such ‘ “Nonesuch” was the name              Cassio with a parody of courtly
   of a popular tune’ (Honigmann).                  circumlocution.
19 put . . . pipes put away your pipes. The      28 stirring sexually arousing (cf. Measure,
   clown playfully restores its literal mean-       2.2.190; Revenger’s Tragedy, 1.2.179,
   ing to a proverbial phrase meaning ‘make         2.1.196; and Williams, Glossary, p. 290)
   an end’.                                      30 In . . . time you have arrived at a lucky
   in your bag Presumably the bag in which          moment

                                             280
                           Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   3.1

iago
  You haven’t been a-bed then?
cassio                             Why, no: the day had broke
  Before we parted. I’ve made bold, Iago,
  To send in to your wife. My suit to her
  Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
  Procure me some access.                                                                  35
iago                         I’ll send her to you presently:
  And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor
  Out of the way, that your converse and business
  May be more free.                                        Exit
cassio                I humbly thank you for’t.
  I never knew a Florentine more kind and honest!                                         40
       Enter Emilia
emilia
  Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry
  For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
  The general and his wife are talking of it,
  And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies
  That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus                                              45
  And great afﬁnity; and that in wholesome wisdom
  He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loves you
  And needs no other suitor but his likings
  To take the safest occasion by the front
  To bring you in again.

31 haven’t] after q (ha not); haue not f 32 I’ve] after q (I ha); I haue f    40.1 Emilia] f
(Æmilia); Emilla q 42 sure] f; soone q 49 To . . . front] q; not in f


31–6 Why . . . presently The lineation here       wholesome wisdom prudent common
   is difﬁcult to reconstruct with any cer-       sense
   tainty; but Sanders’s solution has the      47 might not but had no option but to
   merit of allowing for some slightly awk-    49 To . . . front In Renaissance iconogra-
   ward pausing around the question of            phy Occasion or Opportunity was repre-
   Cassio’s access to Emilia.                     sented as a bald-headed woman with a
36 presently forthwith                            single lock of hair hanging over her fore-
37 mean means                                     head (front); it was necessary to seize her
40 a Florentine even a Florentine (i.e. one       by the forelock before she passed out of
   of his own countrymen, hence the inten-        reach. Cf. Dent T311, ‘Take time (occa-
   siﬁed sense of kind)                           sion) by the forelock, for she is bald
42 your displeasure the disfavour into            behind’. The line was probably omitted
   which you have fallen                          from F as a result of eye-skip to the second
44 stoutly resolutely, vigorously                 To.
46 great afﬁnity he has powerful family
   connections

                                          281
3.1                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

cassio.                  Yet I beseech you,                                             50
  If you think ﬁt, or that it may be done,
  Give me advantage of some brief discourse
  With Desdemon alone.
emilia                     Pray you, come in:
  I will bestow you where you shall have time
  To speak your bosom freely.
cassio                          I am much bound to you.                                 55
                                                    Exeunt

3.2    Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen
othello
  These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
  And by him do my duties to the Senate;
  That done, I will be walking on the works:
  Repair there to me.
iago                   Well, my good lord, I’ll do’t.
othello
  This fortiﬁcation, gentlemen, shall we see’t?                                          5
gentlemen
  We’ll wait upon your lordship.                                       Exeunt

3.3     Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and Emilia
desdemona
  Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
  All my abilities in thy behalf.
emilia
  Good madam, do: I warrant it grieves my husband,
  As if the cause were his.
desdemona
  O, that’s an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,                                      5

53 Desdemon] f; Desdemona q 55 cassio . . . you] f, q2; not in q1 55.1 Exeunt] q; not in f
3.2] f (Scœna Secunda.); not in q 0.1 and Gentlemen] f; and other Gentlemen q 1 pilot] f;
Pilate q 2 Senate] f; State q 6 We’ll] f (Well); We q
3.3] f (Scœna Tertia.); not in q 3 warrant] f; know q 4 cause] f; case q

50 To . . . again to reinstate you in your      3 works fortiﬁcations
   ofﬁce (OED v. 18d)                           6 wait upon attend (as servants ‘attend’ or
55 speak your bosom utter your most inti-         ‘wait upon’ their masters)
   mate thoughts                               3.3 The temptation scene is elaborated from
   bound to you Part of the play’s rhetoric       a number of discrete episodes in Giraldi;
   of service, equivalent to ‘your servant’.      see App. C, pp. 439–43.
3.2.2 do my duties offer my dutiful service     1 do apply, use (OED n. 3, 9)

                                           282
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   3.3

  But I will have my lord and you again
  As friendly as you were.
cassio                      Bounteous madam,
  Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
  He’s never anything but your true servant.
desdemona
  I know’t. I thank you. You do love my lord;                                                 10
  You have known him long; and be you well assured
  He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
  Than in a politic distance.
cassio                         Ay; but, lady,
  That policy may either last so long,
  Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,                                                   15
  Or breed itself so out of circumstances,
  That, I being absent and my place supplied,
  My general will forget my love and service.
desdemona
  Do not doubt that: before Emilia here,
  I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,                                             20
  If I do vow a friendship I’ll perform it
  To the last article. My lord shall never rest,
10 I know’t] f; O sir q 12 strangeness] f; strangest q       14 That] f, q2; The q1      16 cir-
cumstances] f; circumstance q

 9 servant The nuances of Cassio’s                   conversations with Cassio, to the more
   language here will be difﬁcult for a              formal you, may indicate that she herself
   modern audience to catch: true servant is         is sensitive to the implications of his lan-
   essentially a routine courtesy, but one           guage, and feels the need to re-establish a
   complicated by awareness of Cassio’s              proper distance between them.
   subordinate role as an ofﬁcer in the service   12–13 He . . . distance      the     estranged
   (l. 18) of a general whose wife (as Iago’s        distance he puts between you will be
   hyperbole has it) ‘is now the general’            no greater than practical wisdom
   (2.3.302–3); moreover, servant can also           requires
   mean ‘lover’ (a usage deriving from the        15 nice and waterish Usually interpreted
   conventions of chivalric love, which typi-        as ‘thin and dilute’; but in this context a
   cally involved a knight’s offer of ‘service’      more appropriate sense would seem to be
   to the wife of his lord). While Cassio (in        ‘luxurious and succulent’ (OED, nice, a.
   the conventional way of Renaissance               4d, 14; waterish, a. 11).
   courtiers) does no more than glance play-      16 breed . . . circumstances          generate
   fully at this latter meaning, for the             itself (or develop) as a result of casual
   audience it is inevitably given a more            circumstances
   dangerous charge by Iago’s insinuations.       18 love and service Cf. l. 9. The innocent
   It is thus a further reminder of the way in       conjunction of ‘love and service’ may
   which Cassio’s relations with women are           again be tinged with unfortunate
   tinged with an urbanely eroticized gal-           suggestions.
   lantry that can easily be turned against       19 doubt fear
   him. Desdemona’s switch in the following       20 warrant guarantee
   line from the intimate thou, usual in her      22 article clause in a contract or treaty

                                              283
3.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  I’ll watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
  His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
  I’ll intermingle everything he does                                                          25
  With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
  For thy solicitor shall rather die
  Than give thy cause away.
         Enter Othello and Iago
emilia                          Madam, here comes my lord.
cassio
  Madam, I’ll take my leave.
desdemona                       Why stay, and hear me speak.
cassio
  Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,                                                       30
  Unﬁt for mine own purposes.
desdemona Well, do your discretion.                Exit Cassio
iago Ha? I like not that.
othello What dost thou say?

28 thy cause away] f, q2; thee cause: away q1 28.1 Enter . . . Iago] f; Enter Othello, Iago,
and Gentlemen. q 31 purposes] f; purpose q


23 watch him tame tame him by keeping              Desdemona’s legal language (‘warrant
   him awake; a metaphor from the practice         . . . article . . . suit . . . cause’) a play on
   of falconry, more usually applied to the        the relatively novel technical sense of the
   domestication of wives by husbands (cf.         word (‘one practising in a court of equity,
   Shrew, 4.1.176–97; Troilus, 3.2.41–2).          as distinguished from an attorney’, OED n.
24 bed . . . board Alluding to the legal deﬁ-      3a) seems likely.
   nition of marriage as an agreement to        28 give . . . away abandon your case. The
   share ‘bed and board’; the usual form of        sense of moral ‘cause’ is also present.
   marital separation, for example, was         32–4 Well . . . say Most editors treat 32–3 as
   known as divortium a mensa et thoro (=          a single line and 34 as a half-line, but 33
   divorce from table and bed); and at least       may combine amphibiously with ll. 32
   one medieval version of the marriage rite       and 34, creating lines that are respectively
   contained the phrase ‘to hold and to have       one syllable long and one syllable short.
   at bed and at board’ (OED n. 1c); cf. also      Despite these irregularities, the rhythmic
   Hymen’s song in AYLI, 5.4.140: ‘O               quality of the lines suggests that they are
   blessèd bond of board and bed’).                intended as verse; and it would be equally
   school In Shrew Shakespeare had made            possible to treat them as three incomplete
   extensive comic capital from the idea of        lines, indicating awkward pausing rather
   the household as a kind of school               than quick, nervous cueing.
   designed to discipline an unruly spouse,     32 do your discretion behave as you think
   especially through Petruccio’s ‘taming-         wise
   school’ (4.2.55). Desdemona’s schooling      33 Ha? In Shakespeare’s time a question
   of Othello will reverse the conventional        mark was often used where we would
   gender roles.                                   expect an exclamation mark; and editors
   board table                                     normally assume that this is the case
   shrift place of confession or penance           here. But Iago’s ha may indeed be a
27 solicitor Literally ‘one who petitions          rhetorical interrogative, equivalent to
   or entreats’; but in the context of             ‘eh?’ or ‘what’s that?’

                                            284
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 3.3

iago
  Nothing, my lord; or if—I know not what.                                                  35
othello
  Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
iago
  Cassio, my lord?—No, sure, I cannot think it
  That he would steal away so guilty-like,
  Seeing you coming.
othello I do believe ’twas he.                                                             40
desdemona How now, my lord?
  I have been talking with a suitor here,
  A man that languishes in your displeasure.
othello Who is’t you mean?
desdemona
  Why, your lieutenant, Cassio—good my lord,                                                45
  If I have any grace or power to move you,
  His present reconciliation take;
  For if he be not one that truly loves you,
  That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
  I have no judgement in an honest face.                                                    50
  I prithee call him back.
othello Went he hence now?
desdemona Yes, faith: so humbled
  That he hath left part of his grief with me
  To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.                                             55
othello
  Not now, sweet Desdemon—some other time.
desdemona
  But shall’t be shortly?
38 steal] f, q2; sneake q1 39 you] q; your f 53 Yes, faith] q; I sooth f 54 hath] f; has
q grief] f; griefes q 55 To] f, q2; I q1 56 Desdemon] f, q2; Desdemona q1

40 I . . . he Metrically amphibious.               49 in cunning knowingly; because of his
42–75 I have . . . do much Cf. Giraldi, App.          crafty nature (as opposed to his ‘honest
   C, p. 439.                                         face’)
43 languishes Stronger than today: it sug-         51–3 I . . . humbled Here again the versiﬁ-
   gests that Cassio’s health is broken by his        cation is uncertain. Most editors treat
   remorse.                                           51–2 as forming a single line; but, since
46 grace pleasing quality, beauty; favour             quick cueing seems desirable here, 52
   (in your eyes)                                     is probably amphibious, and humbled
47 His . . . take Either ‘restore him to              trisyllabic.
   immediate favour’ (Sanders; OED, recon-
   ciliation, n. 1c); or ‘accept the reconcilia-
   tion he now sues for’.

                                               285
3.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello                   The sooner, sweet, for you.
desdemona
  Shall’t be tonight, at supper?
othello                          No, not tonight.
desdemona
  Tomorrow dinner, then?
othello                     I shall not dine at home:
  I meet the captains at the citadel.                                                     60
desdemona
  Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
  On Tuesday noon, or night, on Wednesday morn—
  I prithee name the time, but let it not
  Exceed three days. I’faith he’s penitent;
  And yet his trespass, in our common reason—                                              65
  Save that they say the wars must make example
  Out of her best—is not almost a fault
  T’incur a private check. When shall he come?
  Tell me, Othello! I wonder in my soul
  What you would ask me, that I should deny                                                70
  Or stand so mamm’ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
  That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
  When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
  Hath ta’en your part—to have so much to do
  To bring him in? By’r Lady, I could do much—                                             75
othello
  Prithee no more: let him come when he will—
  I will deny thee nothing.
desdemona                   Why, this is not a boon:
61 or] q; on f 62 noon] f; morne q      on Wednesday] f; or Wensday q 64 I’faith]
q (Ifaith); Infaith f 66 example] f; examples q 67 her best] f, q; their best rowe
70 would] f; could q 71 mamm’ring] f, q2; muttering q1 75 By’r Lady] q1; Trust me f,
q2

59 dinner The meal was eaten about noon.         71 mamm’ring stammering with indecision
65 trespass offence                              74 to do This may be the substantival
   in . . . reason in the general opinion; or,      to-do (= ado, fuss, business: OED, do, v.
   from a common-sense point of view                33b), a slightly stronger usage which
67 her best the most distinguished, or high-        would ﬁt the playful impatience of the
   est-ranking soldiers. Honigmann follows          speech.
   Rowe in emending to ‘their best’; but wars    75 To . . . in Cf. 3.1.50.
   is treated as a singular noun elsewhere;      77–84 Why . . . granted Desdemona con-
   see e.g. 1.1.149–50, 1.3.233, 3.3.351–2.         trasts the cosily domestic entreaties
67–8 is . . . check is scarcely a serious           proper to a dutiful wife with the extrava-
   enough fault to deserve even a private           gant trials conventionally imposed on
   rebuke (let alone public humiliation)            chivalric lovers by their mistresses.

                                             286
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      3.3

  ’Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
  Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
  Or sue to you to do a peculiar proﬁt                                                        80
  To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit
  Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
  It shall be full of poise and difﬁcult weight,
  And fearful to be granted.
othello                        I will deny thee nothing.
  Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this:                                                  85
  To leave me but a little to myself.
desdemona
  Shall I deny you? No! Farewell, my lord.
othello
  Farewell, my Desdemona, I’ll come to thee straight.
desdemona
  Emilia, come. (To Othello) Be as your fancies teach you:
  Whate’er you be, I am obedient.                                                             90
                                  Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia
othello
  Excellent wretch, perdition catch my soul
  But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
  Chaos is come again.
83 difﬁcult weight] f, q2; difﬁculty q1   89 Be] f; be it q   90.1 Exeunt . . . Emilia] q (subs.);
Exit. f

80–1 do . . . person do yourself a special       93 Chaos . . . again This line is often taken
   favour                                           as a reference to the barbaric confusion
82 touch put to the test (OED v. 8a)                of Othello’s pre-Venetian past: Patrick
83 poise weight, gravity, importance                Stewart, for example, spoke it with a
85 Whereon for which reason; or, ‘so, for           heavy stress on again. But for contem-
   the moment’                                      poraries it will have had a larger, more
88 straight at once                                 philosophic resonance, since it invokes
89 fancies moods, whims                             the classical myth according to which
90 obedient Obedience was the ﬁrst quality          only the power of Love (the ﬁrst of the
   required of a good wife under the patri-         immortals to emerge from primal Chaos)
   archal rules of domestic government. The         prevents the created universe from falling
   word will become the object of Othello’s         back into its original confusion, a Chaos
   obsessive attention in Act 4, Scene 1 (ll.       imagined as primordial blackness. So in
   239–48), with its violent replay of Desde-       Venus, Venus imagines the death of her
   mona’s submissive departure here.                beloved in language strikingly close to
91 wretch Mock-denigration commonly                 Othello’s: ‘For he being dead, with him is
   used as endearment.                              beauty slain, | And beauty dead, black
91–2 perdition . . . do love thee A signiﬁ-         chaos comes again’ (ll. 1019–20). Cf. also
   cant ambiguity: either (a) may I be              Spenser, An Hymne of Love (ll. 57–91);
   damned if I do not love you; or (b) I            Jonson, Masque of Beautie, ll. 282–4,
   love you even at the risk of incurring           325–6, and Love Freed from Ignorance and
   damnation.                                       Folly, 36–7.

                                             287
3.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago My noble lord—
othello What dost thou say, Iago?                                                          95
iago
  Did Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady,
  Know of your love?
othello                He did, from ﬁrst to last—
  Why dost thou ask?
iago
  But for a satisfaction of my thought,
  No further harm.
othello              Why of thy thought, Iago?                                           100
iago
  I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
othello
  O yes, and went between us very oft.
iago                                    Indeed?
othello
  Indeed? Ay, indeed. Discern’st thou aught in that?
  Is he not honest?
iago Honest, my lord?                                                                    105
othello Honest? Ay, honest.
iago
  My lord, for aught I know.
othello                       What dost thou think?
iago Think, my lord?
othello
  ‘Think, my lord’? By heaven, thou echo’st me,
  As if there were some monster in thy thought                                           110

96 you] q; he f 99 thought] f, q2; thoughts q1 102 oft] f, q2; often q1 103 Ay] f (I),
q2; not in q1 109 By heaven, thou echo’st] pope (subs.); Alas, thou ecchos’t f; By heauen he
ecchoes q1; why dost thou ecchoe q2 110 thy] f, q2; his q1

94 My . . . lord This part-line is treated as      seem justiﬁed by the stress on the key term
   amphibious, but the verse scheme is             ‘honest’.
   uncertain here.                              104, 105, 106 honest (a) frank, straightfor-
104–6 Is . . . Ay, honest The versiﬁcation         ward and dependable; (b) honourable; (c)
   is again uncertain: these may (as here)         chaste. Iago’s repetition of the word has
   be treated as three separate half-lines,        the effect of opening up its dangerous
   requiring heavy pausing; or as two              ambiguities to Othello.
   incomplete (nine-syllable) lines linked by   110 monster deformed, unnatural creature,
   an amphibious l. 105; or the speakers may       prodigy. Othello’s metaphor ironically
   simply lapse into prose. Any decision will      echoes Iago’s vision of his plot as a ‘mon-
   have a signiﬁcant effect on the pacing of       strous birth’ (1.3.393).
   the scene. Pregnant pauses, however,

                                            288
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    3.3

  Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something:
  I heard thee say even now thou likedst not that,
  When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
  And when I told thee he was of my counsel
  In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst ‘Indeed?’                                      115
  And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
  As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
  Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me,
  Show me thy thought.
iago My lord, you know I love you.                                                          120
othello I think thou dost;
  And, for I know thou’rt full of love and honesty,
  And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them breath,
  Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more—
  For such things in a false, disloyal knave                                                125
  Are tricks of custom, but in a man that’s just,
  They’re close dilations, working from the heart,

111 dost] f, q2; didst q1 112 even] f; but q 115 In] q; Of f 118 conceit] f, q2; counsell
q1 123 giv’st them] f; giue em q1; giu’st ’em q2 124 fright] f, q2; affright q1 127 dila-
tions] f, q2; denotements q1; delations steevens (conj. Johnson)


111 Too . . . shown Othello’s hyperbole             Inevitably too, in this context, tricks will
   picks up on the false etymology that             have the additional suggestion of ‘under-
   derived monster from Latin monstro               hand stratagems’.
   (= show) rather than moneo (= warn); a        127 close secret; intimate
   play on hide/hideous also seems to be            dilations (a) delays, evasions; (b) am-
   involved: see Introduction, pp. 139–42.          pliﬁcations or enlargements, either of
114 of my counsel in my conﬁdence                   meaning or (as Kittredge suggested) of
118 conceit notion, fancy; with a subdued           the overcharged heart; (c) delations,
   play on ‘conception’ that again links it         denunciations: equivalent to Q’s denote-
   to Iago’s obscenely ‘engendered’ plot            ments. If Q2’s emendation at 2.3.305 is
   (1.3.392–3).                                     correct, then denotement was certainly a
119 Show . . . thought The idea of                  word in the dramatist’s mind during the
   thoughts as substantial objects, capable of      composition of the play. But the F reading
   discovery in a body that can be opened to        here, as at l. 128 (be sworn for Q presume),
   the view, may owe something to the new           is not only stronger, but sufﬁciently differ-
   science of anatomy. See Neill, ‘Opening’,        ent to suggest revision on the dramatist’s
   pp. 142–5, and cf. l. 166.                       part. The rarity of denotement makes it
120 My . . . love you Ridley detects ‘a hor-        unlikely that it was simply an actor’s sub-
   rible reminiscence’ of St Peter’s ‘Lord,         stitution (as presume might otherwise
   thou knowest that I love thee’ (John 21:         easily be), unless it were imported from
   15–17). Metrically amphibious.                   2.3.305. For detailed analysis of the com-
124 stops abrupt breakings off                      plex play of suggestions in this passage,
126 tricks of custom customary habits               see Parker, ‘Dilation’. As Parker points
   (OED, trick, n. 7); i.e. predictable and         out, Steevens’s delations, while apposite, is
   purely external behaviour, as opposed to         not really a true emendation, since the
   the intimate signs of inward emotion             words were not at this time orthographic-
   characteristic of ‘a man that’s just’.           ally distinct.

                                             289
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  That passion cannot rule.
iago                         For Michael Cassio,
  I dare be sworn, I think, that he is honest.
othello
  I think so too.
iago              Men should be what they seem—                                            130
  Or those that be not, would they might seem none.
othello
  Certain, men should be what they seem.
iago
  Why, then I think Cassio’s an honest man.
othello
  Nay, yet there’s more in this!
  I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings,                                               135
  As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
  The worst of words.
iago                   Good my lord, pardon me:
  Though I am bound to every act of duty,
  I am not bound to that all slaves are free to—
  Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false—                                     140
  As where’s that palace whereinto foul things
  Sometimes intrude not?—who has that breast so pure
  Where no uncleanly apprehensions
  Keep leets and law-days, and in sessions sit
  With meditations lawful?                                                                 145



129 be sworn . . . that] honigmann; be sworne, I thinke that f, q2; presume, I thinke that
q1; most editors read ‘be sworn I think that’ 130 what] f, q2; that q1 134 Nay, yet] f,
q2; ~Ÿ ~ q1 135 as to] f, q2; to q1 136 thy . . . thoughts] f, q2; the worst of thought q1
137 words] f, q2; word q1 139 I . . . free to] q; I . . . that: All Slaues are free: f 142 that]
f; a q 143 Where no] This edition (conj. Furness); Wherein f; But some q 144 sessions]
f; Session q



128 That . . . rule that passion is unable to        ing a loaded point about the limits of
   control; i.e. Iago’s ‘stops’ are signs of an      ‘service’; cf. 1.1.43–60.
   emotion that inevitably betrays itself.        143 uncleanly apprehensions foul ideas
130 Men . . . seem Dent S214, ‘Be what            144 leets manorial courts of record; here =
   thou would seem to be’.                           the sessions of such courts.
131 none nothing of the sort. One of Iago’s          law-days days assigned for the sessions of
   typically oblique constructions.                  leets and other courts. Cf. Stubbes, Anato-
139 that . . . to that which even slaves are         my of Abuses, 1583 (cited in OED, law-day,
   free to do [or not to do]. Behind his appar-      n. 1), ‘In every shire or county be courts,
   ently genial philosophizing, Iago is mak-         law days, and leets . . . every month’.

                                              290
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    3.3

othello
  Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
  If thou but think’st him wronged, and mak’st his ear
  A stranger to thy thoughts.
iago                           I do beseech you—
  Though I perchance am vicious in my guess
  (As I confess it is my nature’s plague                                                     150
  To spy into abuses), and oft my jealousy
  Shapes faults that are not—that your wisdom yet,
  From one that so imperfectly conjects,
  Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
  Out of his scattering and unsure observance.                                               155
  It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
  Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
  To let you know my thoughts.
151–2 oft . . . Shapes] q; of . . . Shapes f; of . . . Shape knight 152 that your wisdom yet]
q2; that your wisedome f; I intreate you then q1; that your wisdom then walker 153 con-
jects] q1 (coniects); conceits f, q2 154 Would] f, q2; You’d q1 155 his] f; my q
157 and] f; or q

146 thy friend An important moment:               152 that your wisdom Q’s I intreate you
   responding to Iago’s protestation of ‘love’       then, which simpliﬁes Iago’s contorted
   (l. 120), Othello elevates him from the           syntax while diluting the meaning,
   servantly role deﬁned by his rank                 looks like the sort of convenient substitu-
   (1.1.41–60) to the intimate status of             tion that an actor, wrestling with the
   ‘friend’. The intimacy of his gesture is          sense of the line, might well be tempted to
   stressed by the singular pronoun. Renais-         make.
   sance texts on friendship stress the equal     153 conjects conjectures. F’s conceits
   and disinterested nature of friendship,           (= imagines) is also possible, but looks like
   and the consequent impossibility of a sub-        a very easy misreading for Q’s much rarer
   ordinate’s acting as a true friend, uncon-        coniects.
   taminated by self-interest.                    155 scattering . . . observance erratic and
148–55 I . . . observance This convoluted            unreliable observation (OED, scattering,
   sentence, in which parenthesis is enfolded        ppl. a. 1a)
   within parenthesis and clause piled on         156, 157 for good for
   clause, is a beautiful example of Iago’s       158 What . . . mean Honigmann’s attempt
   technique of syntactical mystiﬁcation.            to incorporate Q’s Zouns (on the
151 oft my jealousy F’s of my jealousy makes         assumption that it was purged from
   sense if combined with Knight’s emenda-           F: see App. B, pp. 420–1) produces an
   tion of shapes to shape; but the fact that        awkward extra-metrical lurch in the
   both F and Q print shapes makes it more           middle of the line. Unlike Q, F is metri-
   likely that a t has dropped from F, either        cally complete here and (it can be argued)
   through misreading or compositorial               dramatically stronger. Given that Q may
   carelessness.                                     contain elements of memorialization, it
   jealousy (excessive) zeal, vigilance; mis-        is easy to see how an actor might have
   trustfulness. However, for the audience           imported Zouns from l. 168, where it
   the word will inevitably recall Iago’s jeal-      would have been replaced by F’s Ha?
   ous suspicions of Othello and Cassio, and         when the text was purged of oaths;
   the ‘jealousy so strong’ into which               certainly Q’s incomplete version of that
   he vengefully plans to drive the Moor             line suggests the possibility of textual
   (2.1.285–302).                                    corruption.

                                              291
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello                           What dost thou mean?
iago
  Good name in man—and woman—dear my lord,
  Is the immediate jewel of their souls;                                                   160
  Who steals my purse, steals trash: ’tis something
      nothing;
  ’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands.
  But he that ﬁlches from me my good name
  Robs me of that which not enriches him,
  And makes me poor indeed.
othello                   By heaven, I’ll know thy thoughts!                               165
iago
  You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;
  Nor shall not, whilst ’tis in my custody.
othello
  ’Swounds!
iago           O beware, my lord, of jealousy!
  It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
  The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss                                        170
  Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
158 What . . . mean] f, q2; Zouns q1; Zounds! . . . mean honigmann 159 woman—dear]
f, q2 (woman,); woman’s deere q1 160 their] f; our q 161 something nothing] honig-
mann (something-nothing); ~, ~ f, q 165 By heaven] q1; not in f, q2 thoughts] f, q2;
thought q1 168 ’Swounds!] This edition (after q ‘Zouns’, l. 158); Ha? f; not in q my lord, of
] f, q2; not in q1 170 The] f, q2; That q1
159–60 Good . . . souls Cf. Dent N22, ‘A             ﬁgures come together in the ripping out of
   good name is better than riches’. Elabora-        Annabella’s heart at the end of John
   tions of this theme are commonplace in            Ford’s tragedy, ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore.
   the period.                                    168 ’Swounds See above, l. 158
161 trash dross (often contemptuously ap-         169 green-eyed Cf. Merchant, 3.2.110,
   plied to money; see e.g. Caesar, 4.3.26)          ‘green-eyed jealousy’. According to the
   something nothing a something made                doctrine of the humours, jealousy was a
   of nothing. Despite the agreement of F            bilious condition that was supposed to
   and Q in punctuating something, nothing,          impart a greenish hue to the complexion;
   Iago’s paradox seems to be a stock formu-         it is green-eyed because of the exaggerated
   lation: see Dent S620.1.                          watchfulness that in this play translates
166 if . . . hand Honigmann cites Dent               itself into Othello’s compulsive desire for
   H331.2, ‘To have someone’s heart in               ‘ocular proof’ (l. 362).
   one’s hand’, a hyperbolic metonym for             mock deride, render ridiculous; deceive,
   murder which occurs in a number of                delude, befool; tantalize.
   plays, and which perhaps drew on the           170 meat . . . on i.e. its victim. The ﬁgure
   symbolic language of public executions in         suggests something of the strangely self-
   which the hearts of traitors were dis-            generating, self-devouring quality of this
   played to the crowd by the executioner;           emotion: cf. Emilia’s ‘It is a monster |
   but Iago’s ﬁgure seems more closely               Begot upon itself, born on itself’
   related to the investigative delving of ana-      (3.4.156–7).
   tomy, in which the interior spaces of          171 his wronger his adulterous wife. But
   the body were opened to the curiosity of          the phrase may also recall Othello’s much
   an audience (see above, l. 119). The two          emphasized ‘love’ for Cassio.

                                              292
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    3.3

  But O, what damnèd minutes tells he o’er,
  Who dotes yet doubts, suspects yet soundly loves!
othello O misery!
iago
  Poor and content is rich, and rich enough,                                                 175
  But riches ﬁneless, is as poor as winter,
  To him that ever fears he shall be poor:
  Good God the souls of all my tribe defend
  From jealousy!
othello            Why? Why is this?
  Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy,                                                 180
  To follow still the changes of the moon
  With fresh suspicions? No: to be once in doubt
  Is once to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat
  When I shall turn the business of my soul
  To such exsufﬁlate and blown surmises,                                                     185

173 soundly] f; strongly q; fondly knight 178 God] q1; Heauen f, q2 183 once] q; not in
f 185 exsufﬁlate] This edition (after hanmer, ‘exsuffolate’); exufﬂicate f, q blown] q;
blow’d f

172 tells counts                                  178–9 Good . . . jealousy Cf. Dent J38.1,
173 soundly to the full (with perhaps a para-        ‘From jealousy the good Lord deliver us’
   doxical suggestion of undisturbed posses-         (not recorded before Othello).
   sion, as if the doting lover were consumed     178 tribe kindred. The division of the popu-
   by doubts at one moment and absurdly              lation of Venice into six ‘tribes’, no doubt
   complacent the next; cf. ‘sleeping                modelled on those of republican Rome, is
   soundly’). Many editors accept Knight’s           described in Lewkenor, pp. 44, 97.
   emendation, fondly, which is graphically       181 To . . . moon by always responding to
   possible; but the alliterative balance of         each new phase of the moon (as a mad-
   this antithetical line requires either            man would do)
   soundly or Q’s strongly, which looks like      182–3 to . . . resolved to feel the slightest
   an alternative (or perhaps a substitution)        suspicion demands that one make up
   rather than a misreading.                         one’s mind to free oneself immediately
174 O misery Some actors (including Kean             and permanently from doubt; once = both
   and Macready) have made this the point            ‘at once’ and ‘once and for all’; resolved =
   at which Othello ﬁrst glimpses his jealous        both ‘determined’ and ‘freed from uncer-
   destiny; but it can be played simply as a         tainty’; doubt = both ‘uncertainty’ and
   general comment on the torment Iago has           ‘suspicion’.
   described.                                        goat A type of bestial lust; its horns asso-
175 Poor . . . enough Cf. Dent C629, ‘Con-           ciate it with cuckoldry.
   tentment is great riches’, and Tilley          185 exsufﬁlate A much debated crux; the
   W194, ‘The greatest wealth is content-            reading proposed here would mean
   ment with a little’.                              ‘hissed, whispered’. See App. F(iii) for a
176–7 riches . . . poor Cf Tilley R109,              note on the textual reasoning.
   ‘Riches bring care and fears’. ‘Poor as           blown Either (a) whispered (OED, blown,
   winter’, though not listed in Dent or             ppl. a.1 4); or (b) bandied about, rumoured
   Tilley, also has the proverbial ring charac-      (blow, v.1 13); or (c) stale, tainted (blown,
   teristic of Iago’s common-sensical idiom          ppl. a.1 3); or (d) ﬂy-blown (blow, v.1, 28);
   (see 2.3.234).                                    or (e) inﬂated, exaggerated (blown, ppl. a.1
176 ﬁneless limitless (ﬁrst use cited in OED)        5b). In support of (b) Sanders suggestively

                                              293
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Matching thy inference. ’Tis not to make me jealous
  To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
  Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well—
  Where virtue is, these are more virtuous—
  Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw                                                  190
  The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
  For she had eyes and chose me. No, Iago,
  I’ll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
  And, on the proof, there is no more but this:
  Away at once with love or jealousy!                                                        195
iago
  I am glad of this; for now I shall have reason
  To show the love and duty that I bear you
  With franker spirit. Therefore—as I am bound—
  Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof:
  Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio;                                           200
  Wear your eyes thus: not jealous, nor secure—
  I would not have your free and noble nature
  Out of self-bounty be abused—look to’t.
  I know our country disposition well:
  In Venice they do let God see the pranks                                                   205
  They dare not show their husbands; their best
         conscience

188 well] q; not in f   196 this] f; it q   201 eyes] f; eie q   205 God] q1; Heauen f, q2


   cites 2 Henry IV, Ind.15–16 ‘Rumour is a        191 doubt suspicion
   pipe | Blown by surmises, Jealousy’s con-          revolt betrayal, inﬁdelity
   jectures’. F’s blow’d, though it exists as an   193 doubt Cf. ll. 182–3.
   occasional alternative to blown, is a plaus-       prove (a) put my suspicions to the test;
   ible misreading for blown (especially if the       (b) prove my suspicions true.
   copy read blow’n).                              196–200 now . . . Cassio Cf. Giraldi, App.
                                                      C, p. 440.
186 inference conclusion; implication (the         201 Wear use (OED v.1 2b)
   conclusion one is entitled to draw)                secure free from mistrust, over-conﬁdent
186–8 ’Tis . . . well In the dialogue that         202 free noble; ingenuous, free from
   introduces Giraldi’s Hecatommithi, Fabio           suspicion
   warns his interlocutors against the             203 self-bounty innate generosity and
   deceitful attractions of women who ‘with           goodness
   beauty of body and under semblance of              abused deceived, taken advantage of,
   virtue, for instance in singing, playing,          wronged
   dancing lightly and speaking sweetly,           204 I . . . country Iago is the privileged
   hide an ugly and abominable soul’                  insider, Othello the ignorant ‘stranger’;
   (Bullough, vii. 240).                              for the obscene play on ‘country’ see
188 free unreserved (can also have the nega-          Pechter, p. 88, and cf. Hamlet, 3.2.111
   tive sense of ‘over-familiar’, ‘sexually           (‘country matters’).
   bold’).                                         205 pranks Cf. 2.1.141

                                               294
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    3.3

  Is not to leave’t undone, but keep’t unknown.
othello Dost thou say so?
iago
  She did deceive her father, marrying you;
  And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,                                          210
  She loved them most.
othello                    And so she did.
iago                                         Why, go to, then!
  She that so young could give out such a seeming
  To seel her father’s eyes up, close as oak—
  He thought ’twas witchcraft!—But I am much to blame;
  I humbly do beseech you of your pardon                                                     215
  For too much loving you.
othello                        I am bound to thee for ever.
iago
  I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
othello
  Not a jot, not a jot.
iago                    I’faith, I fear it has.
  I hope you will consider what is spoke
  Comes from your love. But I do see you’re moved.                                           220
  I am to pray you not to strain my speech
  To grosser issues, nor to larger reach
  Than to suspicion.
207 leave’t] f, q2; leaue q1 keep’t] q2; kept f; keepe q1          213 seel] f (seele); seale q
218 I’faith] q1; Trust me f, q2 220 your] f; my q

209–11 She . . . most A sly reminder of              man’. Like Iago’s ‘I am your own for ever’
   Brabantio’s threat, ‘She has deceived her         (l. 479), which closes the scene, Othello’s
   father and may thee’ (1.3.291).                   line seems to announce (however uncon-
213 seel See 1.3.267. Q’s seal is probably           sciously) a kind of diabolical pact like that
   not a genuine variant, since the spelling         between Faustus and his diabolic ‘ser-
   of the two words did not become com-              vant’ Mephostophilis in Marlowe’s Dr
   pletely distinct until the early 19th centu-      Faustus.
   ry. However, it usefully draws attention to    220 your love i.e. my love of you. This
   the word-play indicated by ‘close as oak’.        construction (the so-called ‘objective
   close as oak i.e. as the tight grain of this      genitive’) is found elsewhere in Shake-
   timber. Proverbial: Dent O1, citing this as       speare, see e.g. Winter’s Tale, 4.4.500–1:
   the earliest example.                             ‘most opportune to her need, I have | A
214 He . . . witchcraft Again remember-              vessel rides fast by’, where her need is
   ing Brabantio’s denunciations (cf. 1.3.65,        equivalent to ‘our need of her [the ship]’.
   103, 169).                                        Cf. also l. 254; 4.1.90.
216 bound to thee Usually glossed as              221 am to pray must beg
   ‘indebted to you’; but it also carries the        strain force the meaning of (OED v.1 11a)
   sense of ‘tied or bonded to you’, hyperbol-    222 grosser (a) larger; (b) more indecent
   ically inverting the terms of service to          issues conclusions
   make Othello Iago’s indentured ‘bond-             reach scope

                                              295
3.3                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello I will not.
iago Should you do so, my lord,                                                           225
  My speech should fall into such vile success
  Which my thoughts aimed not at: Cassio’s my worthy
       friend—
  My lord, I see you’re moved.
othello                         No, not much moved:
  I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.
iago
  Long live she so!—And long live you to think so!                                        230
othello
  And yet how nature, erring from itself—
iago
  Ay, there’s the point! As—to be bold with you—
  Not to affect many proposèd matches
  Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
  Whereto we see in all things nature tends—                                              235
  Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
  Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural—
  But pardon me: I do not in position
  Distinctly speak of her—though I may fear
  Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,                                            240
  May fall to match you with her country forms,

227 Which] f; As q aimed] f (aym’d); aime q at] q; not in f worthy] f, q2; trusty q1
236 Foh! One] f (Foh, one); Fie we q 237 disproportions] f; disproportion q



224 I will not Cf. ll. 32–4. Probably              grown, overfed; (c) lustful; (d) corrupt,
   amphibious, although it creates two nine-       festering, foul-smelling
   syllable lines.                              237 disproportions deformities, monstrosi-
226 fall . . . success produce such a despi-       ties. Iago is hinting at the kinds of unnat-
   cable outcome.                                  ural coupling he described to Brabantio
229 honest chaste                                  (1.1.88–9, 110–16). ‘Foul’ (= ‘dirty-
233–7 Not . . . unnatural Again remem-             coloured’ (i.e. black), as well as ‘ugly,
   bering Brabantio’s slurs (1.3.97–102);          ﬁlthy, diseased, abominable’, OED adj. 1c,
   and cf. Giraldi, App. C, p. 442.                2, 4b,7, 11a) links them once again to
234 clime region; latitude                         Othello himself.
   complexion temperament, nature;              238 in position in this assertion
   skin-colour (thought to be a marker of       239 Distinctly particularly
   temperament because it expressed the         240 recoiling returning
   humoral constitution of the body)            241 fall to match start comparing
   degree rank                                     her country forms the style of beauty
236 will (a) disposition; (b) wilfulness; (c)      recognized in her own country
   sexual appetite; (d) genitals.                  country A bawdy pun is probably
   rank (a) rebellious, impetuous; (b) over-       intended (see l. 204 n.).

                                            296
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                3.3

  And happily repent.
othello                 Farewell, farewell.
  If more thou dost perceive, let me know more:
  Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
iago (going)
  My lord, I take my leave.                                                              245
othello
  Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
  Sees and knows more, much more than he unfolds.
iago (returning)
  My lord, I would I might entreat your honour
  To scan this thing no farther: leave it to time.
  Although ’tis ﬁt that Cassio have his place—                                           250
  For sure he ﬁlls it up with great ability—
  Yet, if you please to hold him off a while,
  You shall by that perceive him and his means:
  Note if your lady strain his entertainment
  With any strong or vehement importunity;                                                255
  Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
  Let me be thought too busy in my fears
  (As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
  And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.
othello
  Fear not my government.
iago                         I once more take my leave.                                  260
                                                                              Exit


242 Farewell, farewell] f; Farewell q 245 going] capell; not in f, q 248 iago] f, q2; before
‘To scan’ (l. 249) q1 (corr.); not in q1 (uncorr.) returning] capell; not in f, q 249 farther]
f; further q 250 Although ’tis] f; Tho it be q1; And though ’tis q2 252 hold] q; not in
f1; put f2 254 his] f; her q 260.1 Exit] f, q1 (corr.), q2; not in q1 (uncorr.)



242 happily perhaps                               254 strain his entertainment (over-)insist
247 unfolds reveals                                  upon his reinstatement. Another objec-
250–1 place . . . ﬁlls it up An obscene              tive genitive (see l. 220).
   innuendo. Cf. Marlowe, Massacre at Paris,      257 busy prying, ofﬁcious
   Scene xviii, 1–5 (Folger MS version): ‘Now     259 free A treacherous equivocation: (a)
   sir, to you that dares to make a duke cuck-       innocent; (b) licentious, sexually avail-
   old . . . and ﬁll up his room that he should      able (Williams, Dictionary, p. 542;
   occupy.’                                          Glossary, p. 134).
253 means Usually glossed as ‘methods’, but       260 government self-control
   perhaps rather ‘meaning, intention’ (i.e.
   what he’s up to): OED, means, n.

                                              297
3.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello
  This fellow’s of exceeding honesty,
  And knows all qualities, with a learnèd spirit
  Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
  Though that her jesses were my dear heart-strings,
  I’d whistle her off and let her down the wind                                             265
  To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black
  And have not those soft parts of conversation
  That chamberers have, or for I am declined
  Into the vale of years—yet that’s not much—
  She’s gone, I am abused, and my relief                                                    270
  Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
  That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
  And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad
  And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,

262 qualities] q1; quantities f, q2 learnèd] q (learned); learn’d f 263 dealings] f, q2;
dealing q1 266 Haply] f; Happily q 268 chamberers] f, q (corr.); Chamlerers q (uncorr.)
269 vale] f, q2; valt q1 274 of] f; in q


262 qualities characteristics, natures of           Othello’s conscious meaning) a standard
   people. Q2’s decision to emend to F’s            euphemism for sexual intercourse.
   quantities is a strange one, perhaps          268 chamberers frequenters of ladies’
   prompted by a misunderstanding of deal-          chambers, carpet-knights; also a term for
   ing(s) as ‘commercial intercourse’.              valet or chamberlain.
262–3 with . . . dealings with a mind well-      269 vale of years OED’s ﬁrst recorded use of
   versed in all aspects of human conduct           this quasi-proverbial expression. Perhaps
263 haggard A term from falconry: ‘caught           coined by collapsing ‘vale of tears’ (cur-
   after having assumed adult plumage’,             rent since at least 1554) with ‘the valley of
   hence ‘wild, untamed’.                           the shadow of death’ (Psalms 23: 4); Q’s
264 jesses Straps tied to the legs of a hawk,       valt (‘vault’), though an easy misreading,
   used to attach it to the leash.                  would also make sense as a hyperbolic ref-
   heart-strings nerves or tendons sup-             erence to the tomb.
   posed (in early modern anatomy) to brace      270 gone lost, undone
   the heart. The snapping of these strings,     272 delicate A number of meanings are
   under the pressure of great grief, would         probably in play: charming; voluptuous;
   produce a ‘broken heart’.                        tender, tenderly reared; fastidious; ex-
265 I’d . . . wind Falconers would launch           quisite (OED adj. 1, 2a, 4, 5, 6b, 8).
   hawks from their wrist with a whistle: up     273 toad Othello’s imagination (as critics
   wind when in search of prey, and down            often observe) is beginning to be tainted
   wind when they were being turned loose.          with the bestial imagery hitherto charac-
266 at fortune at random (i.e. look after           teristic of Iago. For the quasi-proverbial
   herself)                                         hatefulness of toads, see Troilus,
   Haply, for perhaps, because                      2.3.157–8: ‘I do hate a proud man as I
267 soft Contradictory meanings are pro-            hate the engendering of toads’ (and cf.
   bably involved, registering the soldier’s        Richard III, 4.4.81).
   ambiguous attitude towards the courtly        274 vapour of a dungeon Castle dungeons
   world: ‘pleasing, gentle, reﬁned’, but also      were notoriously ﬁlthy: Marlowe’s
   ‘idle, effeminate, foolish’.                     Edward II, for example, is conﬁned to ‘a
   conversation social behaviour; also              vault up to the knees in water, | To which
   (though this is probably not part of             the channels [sewers] of the castle run, |

                                             298
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  3.3

  Than keep a corner in the thing I love                                                  275
  For others’ uses. Yet ’tis the plague to great ones:
  Prerogatived are they less than the base.
  ’Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:
  Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us
  When we do quicken. Look where she comes—                                               280
        Enter Desdemona and Emilia
  If she be false, O then heaven mocks itself:
  I’ll not believe’t.
desdemona            How now, my dear Othello?
  Your dinner, and the generous islanders
  By you invited, do attend your presence.
othello
  I am to blame.
desdemona          Why do you speak so faintly?                                           285
  Are you not well?
othello
  I have a pain upon my forehead, here.
desdemona
  Faith, that’s with watching: ’twill away again.
  Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
  It will be well.
othello           Your napkin is too little.                                              290

275 keep] f, q (corr.) (keepe); leepe q (uncorr.) the thing] f; a thing q 276 to] f; of q
280 Look where she] f; Desdemona q 280.1 Enter . . . Emilia] f; after ‘beleeue it.’ q 281 O
then heaven mocks] q; Heauen mock’d f 283 islanders] f; Ilander q 285 do . . . faintly]
f; is your speech so faint q 288 Faith] q1; Why f, q2 289 it hard] f, q2; your head q1
290 well] f, q2; well againe q1


   From whence a damp continually ariseth        280 quicken receive life (at conception or
   | That were enough to poison any man’            birth)
   (Edward II, 5.5.2–5).                         281 heaven mocks i.e. when creating
                                                    someone so innocent-seeming
275 keep a corner reserve a small space.         283–4 dinner . . . presence Honigmann
   ‘Corner’ was a slang term for vagina             suggests this may be a cue for sounds of
   (Williams, Dictionary, p. 310; Glossary, p.      offstage revelry.
   82), and the bawdy senses of keep (= keep     283 generous noble, high-ranking; gallant,
   a whore or mistress) and use (= sexual           courageous
   use) are also present.                        287 pain . . . forehead           Deliberately
277 Prerogatived privileged                         ambiguous; the presence of a cuckold’s
278–9 ’Tis . . . fated Cf. Dent C889, ‘Cuck-        horns was supposedly betrayed by an
   olds come by destiny’.                           aching brow; but, if what Iago says at
278 unshunnable First use cited in                  4.1.46 is to be trusted, this might be the
   OED.                                             ﬁrst symptom of an epileptic ﬁt.
279 forkèd i.e. marked with the horns of         288 watching keeping vigilantly awake
   cuckoldry

                                             299
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

        She drops her handkerchief
  Let it alone. Come, I’ll go in with you.
desdemona
  I am very sorry that you are not well.
                                 Exeunt Othello and Desdemona
emilia
  I am glad I have found this napkin:
  This was her ﬁrst remembrance from the Moor;
  My wayward husband hath a hundred times                                                  295
  Wooed me to steal it; but she so loves the token—
  For he conjured her she should ever keep it—
  That she reserves it evermore about her
  To kiss and talk to. I’ll have the work ta’en out,
  And give’t Iago: what he will do with it                                                 300
  Heaven knows, not I—
  I nothing, but to please his fantasy.
        Enter Iago
iago
  How now? What do you here alone?
emilia
  Do not you chide: I have a thing for you.
iago
  You have a thing for me? It is a common thing—                                           305
emilia Hah?
iago To have a foolish wife.
emilia
  O, is that all? What will you give me now
  For that same handkerchief ?
290.1 She . . . handkerchief] rowe; not in f, q 292.1 Exeunt . . . Desdemona] rowe after q (‘Ex.
Oth. and Desd.’ after ‘napkin’, l. 293); Exit. f (after ‘you’, l. 291) 302 but to please] f,
q2; know, but for q1 302.1 Enter Iago] f; after ‘not I’ (l. 301) q 305 You have] f; not in q
307 wife] f, q2; thing q1

293–324 I am glad . . . ﬁnd it Cf. Giraldi,       295 wayward wilful, capricious.
   App. C, p. 441. In Giraldi, however,           297 conjured made her swear. The accent
   Iago steals the handkerchief from                 falls on the second syllable.
   Disdemona’s girdle.                            299 work ta’en out embroidery copied
293 napkin handkerchief (OED n. 2a). For             (OED, work, n. 16; take, v. 87e).
   the medicinal powers associated with the       301 Heaven . . . I Cf. Dent G189.1.
   dyeing of this handkerchief in ‘mummy’,        302 I . . . but I know nothing except
   see below, 3.4.73–4 nn.                           fantasy capricious desires
294 remembrance keepsake. In Shake-               305 common thing Iago plays on the con-
   speare’s time handkerchiefs were luxury           temptuously bawdy sense of both words:
   items, often (like this one) elaborately and      ‘a cunt available to anyone’.
   expensively embroidered.

                                              300
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                       3.3

iago                             What handkerchief ?
emilia What handkerchief ?                                                                      310
  Why that the Moor ﬁrst gave to Desdemona,
  That which so often you did bid me steal.
iago
  Hast stolen it from her?
emilia
  No, faith, she let it drop by negligence,
  And, to th’advantage, I being here took’t up:                                                 315
  Look, here it is.
iago                A good wench! Give it me.
         jHe snatches itk
emilia
  What will you do with it, that you have been
  So earnest to have me ﬁlch it?
iago                               Why, what’s that to you?
emilia
  If it be not for some purpose of import,
  Give’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run mad                                                    320
  When she shall lack it.
iago                        Be not acknown on’t:
  I have use for it. Go, leave me.                Exit Emilia
  I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin,
  And let him ﬁnd it. Triﬂes light as air
310 handkerchief] f (throughout), q2; handkercher q1 (throughout, except sometimes ‘han-
kercher’) 313 stolen] f (stolne); stole q 314 No, faith,] q; No: butŸ f 316 it is] q; ’tis f
316.1 He snatches it] This edition after rowe (before ‘Why . . .’, l. 318); not in f, q 317 with it]
q; with’t f 318 what’s] q; what is f 320 Give’t me] f; Giue mee’t q 321 acknown] f
(acknowne); you knowne q1; you acknowne q2 323 lose] q; loose f

312 so often Frequently cited as an example         319 of import important
   of the play’s so-called ‘double-time             321 lack miss
   scheme’ (see Introduction, pp. 33–6).               Be . . . on’t Do not acknowledge you
   Emilia’s role as Desdemona’s waiting-               know anything about it. Unique in
   woman presumably dates only from Oth-               Shakespeare and already a somewhat
   ello’s request at 1.3.294. Perhaps we are           antiquated form, which may explain
   meant to assign Iago’s importunity to the           Q’s substitution of ‘Be not you known
   voyage; but audiences seldom notice such            on’t’.
   details.                                         323 lose Early modern orthography did not
315 to th’advantage by good fortune; tak-              distinguish between lose and loose (F’s
   ing advantage of the opportunity                    spelling); thus the senses ‘let loose’ and
316 A good wench Playful semi-bawdy:                   ‘shoot’ or ‘let ﬂy’ (as in loose an arrow) are
   actors often play up the cynical eroticism          also appropriate here, given the dan-
   of this encounter, which Iago brings to an          gerous thing that Iago has made of the
   abrupt end at ll. 321–2.                            handkerchief.
318 So . . . you A hexameter line that
   requires some elision (‘t’have’).

                                               301
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Are to the jealous conﬁrmations strong                                                      325
  As proofs of holy writ. This may do something.
  The Moor already changes with my poison:
  Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
  Which at the ﬁrst are scarce found to distaste,
  But, with a little act upon the blood,                                                      330
  Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so.
       Enter Othello
  Look where he comes. Not poppy, nor mandragora,
  Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world
  Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
  Which thou owedst yesterday.
othello                           Ha, ha, false to me?                                        335
iago
  Why, how now, general? No more of that!
othello
  Avaunt, be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack:
  I swear ’tis better to be much abused
  Than but to know’t a little.
iago                           How now, my lord?

327 The . . . poison] f, q2; not in q1 330 act upon] f, q2; art, vpon q1 331 mines] f, q2;
mindes q1 331.1 Enter Othello] f; after ‘blood’ (l. 330) q 335 to me] f; to mee, to mee q
339 know’t] f, q2; know q1


326 of holy writ culled from the Bible               Greene, Orlando Furioso (ed. 1874, p.
327 The . . . poison Omission of this line           107b): ‘Naught can serve to quench the
   from Q may represent a deliberate cut, or         aspiring ﬂames | That burn as do the ﬁres
   an actor’s omission; but it might equally         of Sicily’. In Iago’s mouth, however,
   be the result of eye-skip to ‘poisons’ at l.      the words are bound to suggest the
   328. Rizvi (see 2.3.153–6), ﬁnding the            ‘sulph’rous . . . ﬂames’ of hell (Hamlet,
   repetition of ‘poison’ awkward, suggests          1.5.3), and (in the context of Othello’s
   that the line represents a false start            jealousy) perhaps also the ‘sulphurous
   intended for cancellation; he may be cor-         pit’ that Lear locates in the ‘hell’ of female
   rect, but the Q2 editor clearly thought the       genitalia (Trag. Lear, 4.5.124–5).
   line worth restoring.                          332–5 Not . . . yesterday A ‘chillingly
328 conceits ideas, imaginings                       effortless, mocking parody of sustained
329 distaste offend the taste, nauseate              Othello-like sonorities’ (Bradshaw, p.
330 act action                                       271).
   blood Both literal and metaphorical:           332 poppy opium (used as a painkiller and
   Iago’s poisonous insinuations act upon            sedative)
   Othello’s passions (‘blood’) as poison acts       mandragora The mandrake plant, from
   upon the life ﬂuid itself.                        which a narcotic, valued for its analgesic
331 Burn . . . sulphur Hart cites Pliny,             properties, was extracted. Cf. Antony,
   35.15: ‘Sulphur . . . is engendered within        1.5.3–5.
   the Islands Aeoliae, which lie between         335 owedst owned (OED v. 1a)
   Italy and Sicily . . . which . . . do always   337 Avaunt away with you
   burn by reason thereof’ (sig. Bbb2v); and      338 abused Cf. l. 203.

                                              302
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                     3.3

othello
  What sense had I in her stolen hours of lust?                                                340
  I saw’t not, thought it not—it harm’d not me;
  I slept the next night well, fed well, was free, and merry;
  I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips.
  He that is robbed, not wanting what is stolen,
  Let him not know’t, and he’s not robbed at all.                                              345
iago
  I am sorry to hear this.
othello
  I had been happy if the general camp,
  Pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body,
  So I had nothing known. O, now for ever
  Farewell the tranquil mind; farewell content;                                                350
  Farewell the plumèd troops, and the big wars
  That makes ambition virtue—O, farewell!
  Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
  The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing ﬁfe,
  The royal banner, and all quality,                                                           355
  Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war;
  And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
340 in] f; of q 342 fed well] f; not in q 345 know’t] f, q2; know’r q1               351 troops] f
(Troopes); troope q 357 you] f; ye q rude] f; wide q

340 What sense how much awareness (i.e.             349 So provided that
   Othello implies that his senses were             350 tranquil First recorded use in OED.
   asleep)                                          351 big mighty, violent (OED a. 1, 2)
   in during                                        351–2 wars . . . makes Cf. l. 67.
341 I . . . me Cf. Dent K179.1 (‘What one           352 virtue (a) moral virtue; (b) manly
   does not know does not hurt’) and L461              excellence, courage: cf. Latin virtus (OED
   (‘He that is not sensible of his loss has lost      n. 7)
   nothing’).                                       354 spirit-stirring courage-rousing (ﬁrst
342 free carefree                                      example cited in OED)
344–5 He . . . all Cf. l. 341. Othello’s lan-       355 royal magniﬁcent, splendid
   guage ironically echoes the paradoxes of            quality excellence (OED n. 1c)
   Brabantio’s argument with the Duke               356 Pride (a) self-esteem; (b) arrogance; (c)
   (1.3.207–10).                                       splendid ostentation; (d) honour, glory
344 wanting feeling the lack of                        (OED n.1 1, 2, 6a, 8b).
347 general camp whole army                            circumstance ceremony (OED n. 7a)
348 Pioneers troops employed to dig roads,             glorious proud, vaunting; eager for
   trenches, fortiﬁcations, mines, etc. (often         glory; illustrious; conferring glory; full of
   the equivalent of punishment battalions).           magniﬁcent display; splendid (OED a.
   Dirty and ill-paid, they were generally the         1–5)
   lowest and least honourable type of sol-         357 mortal engines deadly instruments
   diery. The F and Q spelling (‘pyoners’)             (i.e. cannon)
   indicates a slightly different accenting of         rude harsh, violent; discordant (OED a.
   the word with a stress on the ﬁrst syllable         5, 7)
   only.

                                                303
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Th’immortal Jove’s dread clamours counterfeit,
  Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone.
iago
  Is’t possible, my lord?                                                                   360
othello
  Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore!
  Be sure of it; give me the ocular proof;
        jHe seizes Iago by the throatk
  Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul,
  Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
  Than answer my waked wrath!
iago                                 Is’t come to this?                                     365
othello
  Make me to see’t; or, at the least, so prove it
  That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
  To hang a doubt on—or woe upon thy life!
iago My noble lord—
othello
  If thou dost slander her and torture me,                                                  370
  Never pray more! Abandon all remorse,
  On horror’s head horrors accumulate,
  Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed!
  For nothing canst thou to damnation add
  Greater than that.
iago                   O grace! O heaven forgive me!                                        375
358 dread clamours] f; great clamor q1; great clamors q2 361 thou] f, q (corr.); you q
(uncorr.) 362.1 He seizes . . . throat] after rowe; not in f, q 363 mine] f; mans q1; my q2
375 forgive] f; defend q
358 Jove’s dread clamours i.e. thunder               referred to as the ‘collaring scene’, and is
359 occupation (a) career; (b) sexual pos-           often preserved in modern productions:
   session (of Desdemona); cf. ll. 250–1.            Olivier, for example, ‘lock[ed] Finlay by
360 Is’t possible Cf. 2.3.276.                       the throat and hurl[ed] him to the
361–5 Villain . . . wrath Closely modelled,          ground’ (Tynan, p. 8).
   as Honigmann points out (pp. 232, 377),        367 probation proof
   on Giraldi (see App. C, pp. 440, 443).            hinge ‘that on which something is con-
   Ocular was perhaps suggested by Giraldi’s         ceived to hang’ (OED n. 4a, citing this as
   occhi; but Honigmann cites also Jonson,           the ﬁrst example); hinge derives originally
   Cynthia’s Revels (1600), 2.3.11 (‘ocular          from ‘hang’, and (since the probation) will
   . . . witness’) and Poetaster (1601), 4.5.75      serve as a weapon of sorts, Shakespeare
   (‘ocular temptation’)                             perhaps had in mind the ‘frogs’ and loops
362.1 He . . . throat Rowe’s direction prob-         from which a sword (or ‘hanger’) was sus-
   ably recorded late 17th- and early 18th-          pended from the belt.
   century stage business, which may in           372 accumulate pile up (imperative)
   turn have derived from practice in Shake-      373 amazed Stronger than now: ‘stupeﬁed,
   speare’s time. This piece of business             terriﬁed, crazy’.
   became standard in what was often

                                              304
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  3.3

  Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?
  God by you, take mine ofﬁce—O wretched fool
  That lov’st to make thine honesty a vice!
  O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
  To be direct and honest is not safe!—                                                   380
  I thank you for this proﬁt, and from hence
  I’ll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.
othello
  Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.
iago
  I should be wise; for honesty’s a fool,
  And loses that it works for.
othello                          By the world,                                            385
  I think my wife be honest, and think she is not;
  I think that thou art just, and think thou art not:
  I’ll have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh
377 God by you, take mine] f (buy), q1 (corr.); God buy, you take thine q1 (uncorr.);
God buy you, take my q2 378 lov’st] f; liuest q thine] f, q1 (corr.), q2; mine q1 (uncorr.)
382 sith] f; since q 385–92 By . . . satisiﬁed] f, q2; not in q1 388 Her] q2; My f

377 God by you Goodbye (i.e. ‘I wash my             absence removes the cue for Iago’s goad-
   hands of you’). Cf. 1.3.188.                     ing play with ‘satisfy’ (ll. 395, 396, 403,
   take mine ofﬁce cashier me                       410), together with part of the justiﬁca-
378 lov’st . . . vice Iago accuses himself of       tion for ‘eaten up with passion’ (l. 393);
   habitually following the promptings of his       moreover, l. 385 in the Q version is metri-
   innate honesty to such extremes that it          cally incomplete; presumably, therefore,
   becomes a vice.                                  its omission from Q was a result of inex-
381 proﬁt ‘that which is to the advantage of        pert theatrical cutting.
   some one’, useful lesson (OED n. 1b, citing   386 honest Iago’s remorseless iteration of
   only this example and Measure, 1.4.60)           the word reminds Othello of its sexual
382 I’ll . . . offence A characteristically         meaning.
   ambiguous line: Iago is ostensibly talking    388 Her A famous crux: Q2’s emendation of
   about the affront his honesty has caused         My to her has no independent authority,
   to his ‘friend’ Othello (l. 146); but            and the error (if it is one) is hard to
   since ‘friend’ can also mean ‘mistress’ or       account for. Ridley, following Knight,
   ‘lover’ he can also seem to be glancing          argued strongly for the superiority of F’s
   at the hurt caused by Othello’s love for         reading on the grounds that Othello is
   Desdemona, and Desdemona’s love for              characteristically obsessed with the stain
   Cassio.                                          on his own honour. Dyce, on the other
   sith since                                       hand, thought this argument invalidated
383 shouldst be seem as if you should be            by the own in ‘mine own face’ which F
384 should be ought to be (if I had any             makes superﬂuous; and to this Honig-
   sense)                                           mann adds that ‘the comparison with
   honesty’s a fool Cf. Dent H539.1 (citing         Diana (the moon goddess, patron of
   this as the ﬁrst example). Perhaps another       chastity) points to a woman and her
   of Iago’s pseudo-proverbs.                       chastity, not to a man’. The contrast
385 loses . . . works for Possibly with an          between the unstained purity of ‘Dian’s
   ironic glance at Desdemona’s advocacy of         visage’ and his own ‘begrimed . . . face’
   Cassio’s cause.                                  also suggests that it is Desdemona’s name
385–92 By . . . satisﬁed This passage can           that Othello has in mind.
   hardly be an addition to F, since its            fresh unsullied

                                             305
3.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  As Dian’s visage, is now begrimed and black
  As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,                                           390
  Poison, or ﬁre, or suffocating streams,
  I’ll not endure it. Would I were satisﬁed!
iago
  I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion:
  I do repent me that I put it to you.
  You would be satisﬁed?
othello                     Would? Nay, and I will!                                         395
iago
  And may—but how? How ‘satisﬁed’, my lord?
  Would you the supervisor grossly gape on?
  Behold her tupped?
othello                 Death and damnation! O!
iago
  It were a tedious difﬁculty, I think,

393 sir] q; not in f 395 and] f; not in q 397 supervisor] q1; super-vision f, q2 (superui-
sion) 398 tupped] pope 1728; top’d f; topt q


389 begrimed A metatheatrical conceit: the       394 put it to raised it with
   actor’s face will have been literally         397 supervisor spectator, looker-on (OED’s
   begrimed (covered with soot) to darken his       ﬁrst instance of this usage, a literal trans-
   skin.                                            lation of the Latin original); but perhaps
390–1 cords . . . streams         Traditional       also with a hint of the more usual sense,
   instruments of suicidal despair (cf.             ‘one who supervises the activity of
   Spenser, Faerie Queene, 1.9.50–1, where          others’, implying that Othello will become
   Despair offers the Redcrosse Knight a dag-       a pimp to his own wife. Q seems almost
   ger, ‘swords, ropes, poison, ﬁre, | And all      certainly correct here; but the normally
   that might him to perdition draw’; and           careful Q2 editor’s choice of the F reading
   Kyd, The Spanish Tragedy, 3.12.0, ‘Enter         is disconcerting, especially since OED
   Hieronimo with a poniard in one hand             records no earlier use of supervision,
   and a rope in the other’). However, as           which must therefore have been an
   Honigmann points out, Othello may equ-           unusual word: here it could be the object
   ally be brooding on murder.                      of gape on, and mean something like ‘the
391 suffocating First example cited in OED.         spectacle you are gazing down upon’.
392, 395, 396, 403, 410 satisﬁed . . . satis-    398 tupped Far from representing a ‘soften-
   faction Othello means ‘freed from                ing’ of ‘topped’ (as Rosenberg suggests, p.
   doubt’, but Iago equivocates on two other        36), Pope’s emendation restores the prop-
   meanings, involving the achievement of           er connection with 1.1.89. OED lists top =
   ‘satisfaction’ or atonement through a            ‘copulate with, cover’ (v.1 11), citing this
   duel or revenge killing (OED n. 4), and          as the earliest example; but it seems like-
   sexual ‘satisfaction’ (Williams, Glossary,       ly, as Williams suggests (Dictionary, p.
   pp. 267–8). The same quibble torments            1405) that it is simply a variant of tup. The
   the jealous Leontes in Winter’s Tale             word, with its powerfully animalistic sug-
   (1.2.234–6).                                     gestions, is clearly a favourite of Iago’s,
393 eaten up A glance at Iago’s earlier             and it seems important to preserve the
   description of jealousy as a monster             echo of 1.1. Cf. also 5.2.136.
   ‘which doth mock The meat it feeds on’        399–410 It . . . have’t Cf. Giraldi, App. C,
   (ll. 169–70).                                    p. 440.

                                             306
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  3.3

  To bring them to that prospect. Damn them, then,                                         400
  If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
  More than their own. What then? How then?
  What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction?
  It is impossible you should see this,
  Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,                                          405
  As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
  As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
  If imputation and strong circumstances,
  Which lead directly to the door of truth,
  Will give you satisfaction, you might have’t.                                            410
othello
  Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.
iago
  I do not like the ofﬁce;
  But sith I am entered in this cause so far,
  Pricked to’t by foolish honesty and love,
  I will go on: I lay with Cassio lately;                                                  415

401 do] f; did q bolster] f (boulster), q; balter honigmann conj. 405 prime] f, q; primed
honigmann conj. 410 might] f; may q 411 reason she’s] f; reason, that shee’s q 413 in]
f; into q


400 to that prospect into a position from            MSI-2005 f. 155r) shows a monkey and a
   which they can be viewed in that way              goat in a passionate embrace.
   (OED, prospect, n. 2b)                         406 wolves cf. Dent W601.1, ‘As lecherous
401 bolster lie with. OED lists no other             as a she-wolf’.
   examples of this usage (v. 6) which seems         in pride on heat
   to be Iago’s characteristically vulgar            gross big, monstrous; stupid, ignorant
   coinage. Reducing human bodies to inan-        408 imputation accusation
   imate bed-furnishing, its meaning is prob-        circumstances circumstantial evidence
   ably coloured by the more common sense         409 door of truth Iago’s ﬁgure makes bru-
   ‘to stuff’ (OED v. 4).                            tally concrete the play’s obsession with
402 More other                                       discovering the hidden: ‘Othello is led in
405–6 prime . . . hot . . . salt ruttish, sex-       imagination to stand outside the closed
   ually aroused, lecherous. This is the only        bedroom door’ (Ridley).
   example in OED of prime used in this           412 ofﬁce duty, job; but the word also
   sense; it is presumably connected to prime        recalls Iago’s offer to surrender his com-
   (n.1 7–9) = ‘spring’, ‘prime of life/youth’,      mission (l. 377), thus implying reluctant
   i.e the period of greatest (sexual) vigour.       acceptance of a new ‘ofﬁce’ as Othello’s
   Cf. also Sonnet 97.7, ‘the wanton burden          intelligencer or domestic spy.
   of the prime’, and AYLI, 5.3.35, ‘Love is      413 cause (a) affair; (b) controversy; (c)
   crownèd with the prime’.                          legal case; (d) Othello’s cause. Cf. 5.2.1.
405 goats . . . monkeys Types of lecherous        414 Pricked spurred on
   desire. Cf. Dent G167, ‘As lecherous as a      415 lay with Beds being expensive items,
   goat’, and Hist. Lear 7.194–5, ‘monkeys           they were commonly shared by same-sex
   [are tied] by the loins’. A marginal              friends and by members of the family.
   illustration in the fourteenth-century            However, the erotic dream conjured up
   Macclesﬁeld Psalter (Fitzwilliam Museum           in Iago’s ﬁction produces a kind of

                                              307
3.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  And, being troubled with a raging tooth,
  I could not sleep. There are a kind of men
  So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter
  Their affairs—one of this kind is Cassio:
  In sleep I heard him say ‘Sweet Desdemona,                                                  420
  Let us be wary, let us hide our loves’;
  And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
  Cry ‘O, sweet creature!’, and then kiss me hard,
  As if he plucked up kisses by the roots
  That grew upon my lips, then laid his leg                                                   425
  Over my thigh, and sighed, and kissed, and then
  Cried ‘Cursèd fate that gave thee to the Moor!’
othello
  O monstrous! Monstrous!
iago                          Nay, this was but his dream.
othello
  But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
iago
  ’Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream;                                              430
  And this may help to thicken other proofs,
  That do demonstrate thinly.
421 wary] f, q2; merry q1 423 Cry ‘O] f (Cry, Oh); Cry out q and] q; not in f 425 then
laid] q; laid f; lay rowe; then lay pope; and lay steevens 1785 426 Over] q; ore f
426–7 sighed . . . kissed . . . Cried] q; sigh . . . kisse . . . cry f 429 denoted] f, q2; deuoted
q1 430 iago ’Tis . . . dream] q1; continued to Othello f, q2 431 And] q1; Iago. And f; Iag.
And q2
   homosexual displacement that, by associ-           tical confusion of laid . . . sigh . . . kiss
   ation, further taints Desdemona’s sup-             . . . cry suggests that more was involved
   posed adultery with the ‘monstrous’ and            than a simple misreading of ‘lay’d’ for
   ‘unnatural’. Iago’s reluctant role as ‘Des-        ‘lay’ (as editors who favour the F reading
   demona’ in the dream (apart from its               assume). F’s copy seems to have been cor-
   metatheatrical glance at the fact that all         rupt at this point, perhaps because the
   females on Shakespeare’s stage were                scribe was faced with a partly illegible
   really males) prepares for his active              passage in the manuscript he was
   usurpation of her ‘place’ in the mock-             transcribing.
   marriage that concludes this scene (see         429 foregone conclusion previous copula-
   ‘Places’, pp. 123, 128–30).                        tion. For the bawdy meaning of ‘conclu-
                                                      sion’ see 2.1.159, 254.
418 loose of soul careless about their most        430 shrewd (a) vile; (b) vexatious, piercing;
   inward secrets; but the additional sugges-         (c) ominous, damaging; (d) strongly
   tion of ‘dissolute’ is borne out by the rest       indicative, coming dangerously near the
   of Iago’s narrative.                               truth
422 gripe clutch, squeeze. At this point              doubt suspicion
   Edwin Booth would grasp the Moor’s              431 thicken strengthen, make more
   hand, which Othello would then with-               substantial
   draw in disgust (Furness, p. 207).                 proofs evidence
425–7 That . . . Moor The awkwardness of           432 demonstrate thinly prove less
   F’s metre here, combined with the syntac-          convincingly

                                              308
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  3.3

othello                          I’ll tear her all to pieces!
iago
  Nay, yet be wise: yet we see nothing done—
  She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,
  Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief                                                435
  Spotted with strawberries in your wife’s hand?
othello
  I gave her such a one—’twas my ﬁrst gift.
iago
  I know not that; but such a handkerchief—
  I am sure it was your wife’s—did I today
  See Cassio wipe his beard with.
othello                              If it be that—                                         440
iago
  If it be that, or any, it was hers.
  It speaks against her with the other proofs.
othello
  O, that the slave had forty thousand lives—
  One is too poor, too weak for my revenge!
  Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago:                                                  445
  All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven—’tis gone!

433 yet be] f; but be q 441 any, it was hers.] f; any, it was hers, q; any that was hers,
malone (conjecturing MS ‘yt’ as abbreviation for ‘that’) 445 true] f, q2; time q1

433–4 yet . . . yet . . . yet In a way that            strawberries For their ambiguous sym-
   makes the precise meaning of his reassur-           bolism, see Introduction, p. 155.
   ance hard to pin down, Iago equivocates          442 proofs As at l. 431 this means only ‘evi-
   across several meanings of this word:               dence’, but through sheer repetition the
   (a) still; (b) so far, for the time being; (c)      word begins to acquire the conﬁdent cer-
   but, however; (d) nevertheless, despite             tainty of its other meaning.
   everything.                                      446 fond affectionate; foolishly doting;
433, 435, 440 See . . . seen . . . See The             imbecile, mad
   repetition of the verb contrives to hint            thus . . . gone An implicit stage direc-
   that the handkerchief itself is a kind of           tion, though whether the gesture involves
   ‘ocular proof’ that renders the unseen              Othello’s pufﬁng his love to heaven (as
   visible.                                            most actors assume), or something
433 done Iago quibbles on do = copulate                more violent, depends on one’s inter-
   (Honigmann) and nothing = vagina                    pretation of blow which might mean
   (Williams, p. 219).                                 ‘blast’: see Hamlet, Add. Pass. H.7–8
434 honest yet. Tell As Honigmann indi-                (3.4.209–10): ‘I will delve one yard below
   cates, this line could be signiﬁcantly              their mines | And blow them at the
   repunctuated: ‘honest—yet. Tell’; or even           moon’. Othello’s gesture is repeated in
   ‘honest—yet . . . Tell’.                            Fletcher’s The Woman’s Prize: ‘the plea-
434–6 Tell . . . hand Cf. Giraldi, App. C,             sure I take in her, | Thus I blow off’
   p. 442.                                             (4.5.115–16).
436 Spotted (a) marked, decorated; (b)
   stained, blemished

                                                309
3.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Arise, black Vengeance from thy hollow hell,
  Yield up, O Love, thy crown and hearted throne
  To tyrannous Hate. Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
  For ’tis of aspics’ tongues.
iago                          Yet be content.                                                450
       Othello kneels
othello O, blood, blood, blood!
iago
  Patience, I say: your mind perhaps may change.
othello
  Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
447 thy] q; the f hell] f; Cell q 450 Yet] f; Pray q 450.1 Othello kneels] q1 (he kneeles);
not in f; after ‘aspics’ tongues’ (l. 450) q2; after ‘Swallow them up’ (l. 459) oxford 451 blood,
blood, blood] f; blood, Iago, blood q 452 perhaps] q; not in f 453–60 Iago . . . heaven] f,
q2; not in q1

447–9 Arise . . . Hate Othello imagines              of viper, and famously used in Cleopatra’s
   his transformation in terms of a psy-             suicide; a recollection of Othello’s African
   chomachia of the kind found in morality           past. Cf. also 4.2.16, 5.2.283, 363.
   drama, in which allegorized virtues and           content calm
   vices do battle for the soul of Mankind.       450.1 Othello kneels The ritual of kneeling
447 black Vengeance Revenge is tradition-            whilst pronouncing an oath gave it an
   ally clad in black, the colour of death and       additional sacred force.
   sin; see for instance the ‘sad [i.e. dark]     451–78 O blood . . . fair devil ‘Blood’
   habiliment’ of Tamora in her guise as             refers not just to Othello’s longing for
   Revenge in Titus (5.2.1). In the context of       blood revenge, but also to the passion of
   the racial anxieties that Iago has worked         jealousy that drives him, and to the
   up in Othello, however, it is inevitably          ‘blood’ of sexual desire (Desdemona’s and
   associated with the Moor’s own                    his own).
   blackness.                                     453–60 Iago . . . heaven While it is con-
   hell A notorious crux, in which equally           ceivable that this passage was added to
   forceful arguments have been advanced             the F text, Q’s isolated ‘Never’ is metrical-
   for F’s hell and Q’s cell. Hell (as Knight        ly suspicious; and this speech, for all its
   observed) seems to balance heaven in l.           emotional power, would have been an
   446. In Titus Tamora appears as Revenge           easy one to cut, since it amounts to a
   and claims to come from ‘th’infernal              rhetorical elaboration of ‘never’.
   kingdom’ which Titus calls ‘hell’ (5.2.30,     453–6 Like . . . Hellespont As Muir shows
   86); and in Caesar the Fury Ate (or               (Sources, pp. 188–90), this passage con-
   Revenge) is said to ‘come hot from hell’          tains recollections of several passages in
   (3.1.274); Hart cites ‘hollow hell’ from          Pliny describing the Pontic Sea; notably
   Jasper Heywood’s Thyestes (1560), Scene           ‘And the sea Pontus evermore ﬂoweth
   4, but against this notes an apparent rem-        and runneth out into Propontis, but the
   iniscence of Othello in Armin’s Two Maids         sea never retireth back again within Pon-
   of More-Clacke (1609): ‘Rouse thee black          tus’ (2.97; sig. E4), and ‘out of Pontus the
   Mischief from thy ebon cell’; Sanders             sea always ﬂoweth, and never ebbeth
   notes that Titus refers to ‘Revenge’s cave’       again’ (4.13; sig. I1). ‘Icy’ (l. 454) and
   (3.1.269); while Honigmann notes the              ‘wide’ (l. 459) both occur in the immedi-
   resemblance to death’s ‘eternal cell’ in          ate context of the latter passage, whose
   Hamlet, 5.2.319.                                  emphasis on the power of the Pontic tide
449 fraught freight, burden                          may also have suggested ‘compulsive
450 aspics asps. Venomous North African              course’ and ‘violent pace’; whilst ‘Swal-
   snakes, variously identiﬁed with the              low them up’ seems to derive from a third
   Egyptian sacred cobra and several species         passage at the beginning of Book 6.

                                              310
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      3.3

  Whose icy current and compulsive course,
  Ne’er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on                                                   455
  To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
  Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
  Shall ne’er look back, ne’er ebb to humble love,
  Till that a capable and wide revenge
  Swallow them up. Now, by yon marble heaven,                                                  460
  In the due reverence of a sacred vow,
  I here engage my words.
iago                        Do not rise yet.
        Iago kneels
  Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
  You elements that clip us round about,
  Witness that here Iago doth give up                                                          465
  The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
  To wronged Othello’s service. Let him command,
455 feels] q2; keeps f; knows white (conj. Southern) 462.1 Iago kneels] q2; not in f; after
‘about’ (l. 464) q1 463 you] f, q1; the q2 466 execution] f, q2; excellency q1 hands] f;
hand q

   Shakespeare’s simile may have been sug-            tion, imitating such collocations as Vir-
   gested by the title of the chapter in which        gil’s aequor marmoreum (‘the sea shining
   the ﬁrst passage occurs: ‘What is the rea-         or resplendent like marble’).
   son of the reciprocal ebb and ﬂow of the        462 engage pledge
   seas: and where it is that they keep            462.1 Iago kneels Iago’s response to
   no order, and are without reason’ (p. 42;          Othello’s gesture, when combined with
   emphasis added).                                   the language of his speech (‘hands,
453 Pontic Sea Black Sea                              heart . . . service . . . obey’) and Othello’s
                                                      response (‘I greet thy love’) turns the ritu-
454 compulsive onward-driving                         al into a grotesque troth-plighting in
456 Propontic Sea of Marmora                          which Iago usurps not merely Cassio’s but
   Hellespont Dardanelles                             also Desdemona’s ‘place’.
459 capable capacious, i.e. comprehensive          464 elements atmospheric agencies or
   (OED 2a-b)                                         powers (OED n. 11); cf. Trag. Lear, 3.2.16:
460 Now . . . heaven At this point Olivier,           ‘I tax not you, you elements, with
   in a sensational gesture that impressed            unkindness’.
   nearly all reviewers, tore off his cruciﬁx in      clip embrace, encompass
   order to declare ‘Othello’s a Moor again’,      466 execution performance, operation
   and then (as Harold Hobson saw it)                 wit intelligence
   ‘bowed his head to the ancient gods of             hands, heart ‘Hand and heart’ is a stan-
   magic, barbarism, and human sacriﬁce’              dard formula for surrender to married
   (Tynan, pp. 9, 105).                               love.
   marble An epithet found elsewhere (e.g          467 Othello’s service The ﬁrst time that
   in Marston’s Antonio and Mellida (c.1600),         Iago, who elsewhere addresses Othello
   2.1.230; Timon, 4.3.192, and Cymbeline,            as ‘my lord’ or ‘general’, is conﬁdent
   5.5.181) presumably referring to the               enough to use Othello’s name to his face;
   variegated patterns of sky and clouds, but         but even now it falls short of direct
   perhaps also suggesting the cold indiffer-         address (cf. 4.1.44), and its implicit claim
   ence of the heavens. Hart (citing Upton            to intimacy and equality is balanced by
   and Hazlitt) suggests a classical deriva-          the offer of service. Iago takes ironic satis-

                                               311
3.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  And to obey shall be in me remorse,
  What bloody business ever.
othello                        I greet thy love,
        jThey risek
  Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous;                                    470
  And will upon the instant put thee to’t.
  Within these three days let me hear thee say
  That Cassio’s not alive.
iago                      My friend is dead:
  ’Tis done at your request. But let her live.
othello
  Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her, damn her!                                             475
  Come, go with me apart; I will withdraw
  To furnish me with some swift means of death
  For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
iago
  I am your own for ever.                         Exeunt


468 in me] f, q2; not in q1 469 business] f; worke so q           474 at your] f; as you q
475 damn her, damn her] f; dam her q




   faction, of course, in invoking the very      474 But . . . live Othello has not yet men-
   concept that caused him such bilious             tioned killing Desdemona; it is Iago who is
   indignation in the ﬁrst scene (1.1.41–65),       planting the suggestion.
   here colouring it with the chivalric ideal-   475 minx whore
   ism embodied in the service that medieval     478 fair devil Fair = fair-skinned (as well as
   knights rendered to their lord. In keeping       ‘beautiful’). This oxymoronic formula
   with the erotically charged ambiguities of       had a proverbial currency: see Tilley
   Iago’s ritual, service, in the language of       D310, ‘The white devil is worse than the
   courtly love, was also what the lover            black’, and cf. Webster’s The White Devil
   offered to his lady.                             (1612).
                                                    Now . . . lieutenant Cf. l. 216. This
467–8 command . . . obey While these                speech announces the completion of
   words are appropriate to the military rela-      Iago’s usurping project: not only has he
   tion between Iago and Othello, they are          taken the places of Cassio and Desde-
   equally appropriate to the relation be-          mona, but, through his progressive inver-
   tween husband and wife; cf. l. 90.               sion of the proper power relation between
468 remorse (a manifestation of) pity or            ensign and general, Iago has become
   tender feeling. Honigmann is almost cer-         Othello’s place-taker too. See ‘Places’,
   tainly right in rejecting OED’s gloss ‘a         pp. 128–9.
   solemn obligation’ (n. 4c, citing only this   479 your own for ever Replete with irony:
   example), which seems a long way from            ‘your own’ appeals to a language of ser-
   any recognized use of the word.                  vice in which the man is said to ‘belong’
470 vain empty                                      to the master, but ‘for ever’ hints at the
   bounteous Hinting at generous reward.            Mephistophelian bargain by which Iago
471 put thee to’t put you to the test               has ensnared Othello’s soul.

                                             312
                                Othello, the Moor of Venice                                        3.4

3.4     Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown
desdemona Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio
  lies?
clown I dare not say he lies anywhere.
desdemona Why, man?
clown He’s a soldier, and for me to say a soldier lies—’tis                                            5
  stabbing.
desdemona Go to! Where lodges he?
clown To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.
desdemona Can anything be made of this?
clown I know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a                                             10
  lodging, and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in
  mine own throat.
desdemona Can you enquire him out, and be ediﬁed by
  report?
clown I will catechize the world for him—that is, make                                                15
  questions, and by them answer.
desdemona Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him I have
  moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
clown To do this is within the compass of man’s wit, and
  therefore I will attempt the doing it.                    Exit                                     20

3.4] f (Scæna Quarta.); not in q 0.1 Enter . . . Clown] f; Enter          Desdemonia Emilla and the
Clowne. q 1 Lieutenant] f; the Leiutenant q 5 clown] f, q2;               not in q1 He’s] f; He is q
me] f; one q ’tis] f; is q 8–9 clown . . . this] f, q2; not in q1         11 he lies here, or] f; not in
q 12 mine own] f, q2; my q1 16 by] f, q; bid theobald 18                  on] f; in q 19 man’s wit]
f, q2; a man q1 20 it] f; of it q


3.4.1–20 Like the Clown’s earlier scene with               I hope.’ To accuse a man publicly of lying
   Cassio (3.1.2.1–30), this episode is fre-               (to ‘give the lie’) was tantamount to chal-
   quently omitted in performance. The sud-                lenging him to a duel.
   den change of mood after the temptation             8   is . . . lie to confess myself a liar (because
   can, however, work to powerfully ironic                 I don’t know where he lodges)
   effect.                                           13    ediﬁed instructed. A mock-pompous
 1 sirrah term of address to social                        locution whose religious sense (‘gain spir-
   inferiors                                               itual beneﬁt’) is picked up in the clown’s
1–11 lies . . . his The Clown’s frivolous quib-            ‘catechize’.
   bling on three senses of lie (‘goes to bed’;      15    catechize interrogate (in the question-
   ‘dwells’; ‘tells falsehoods’) anticipates               and-answer fashion of the Christian
   the tormented word-play of 4.1.32–4.                    catechism)
5–6 He’s . . . stabbing Apparently pro-              16    by them answer ‘by them be enabled to
   verbial. Hart cites Dekker, Seven Deadly                answer, or get the information to use in
   Sinnes of London (1606; Arber reprint, p.               my answer’ (Rolfe in Furness); i.e. ‘be edi-
   22), ‘he that gives a soldier the lie, looks to         ﬁed by report’.
   receive the stab’; and Jonson, Every Man          18    moved solicited (OED v. 12b); but with
   In His Humour (1616), 4.4.12–14 : ‘Cob.                 the unwitting, ironic sense of ‘roused to
   How, the lie! . . . do you long to be                   anger’ (9b).
   stabbed, ha? Tib. Why, you are no soldier,        19    compass reach

                                                 313
3.4                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

desdemona
  Where should I lose the handkerchief, Emilia?
emilia I know not, madam.
desdemona
  Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
  Full of crusadoes; and but my noble Moor
  Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness                                             25
  As jealous creatures are, it were enough
  To put him to ill thinking.
emilia                        Is he not jealous?
desdemona
  Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
  Drew all such humours from him.
emilia                                 Look where he comes.
        Enter Othello
desdemona
  I will not leave him now till Cassio                                                     30
  Be called to him. How is’t with you, my lord?
othello
  Well, my good lady. (Aside) O hardness to dissemble!—
  How do you, Desdemona?
desdemona                     Well, my good lord.
othello
  Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.
desdemona
  It yet hath felt no age, nor known no sorrow.                                             35

21 the] f; that q 23 have lost] f; loose q 29.1 Enter Othello] f; after ‘him’ (l. 29) q
30 till] f, q2; ’Tis q1 (uncorr.); Let q1 (corr.) 35 yet] q; not in f hath] f; has q


21 should I lose could I have lost              32 hardness how hard it is
24 crusadoes Portuguese gold coins              34–6 This . . . heart Cf. Tilley H86, ‘A
   stamped with an image of the Cross.             moist hand argues an amorous
   but were it not that                            nature (fruitfulness)’; Antony, 1.2.46–7,
28–9 sun . . . him Cf. Othello’s description       ‘if an oily palm be not a fruiful prognosti-
   of himself as ‘one not easily jealous’          cation’; and Venus, ll. 25–6, ‘his sweating
   (5.2.344). Giraldi’s Disdemona, however,        palm, | The precedent of pith and liveli-
   claims that Moors are naturally volatile.       hood’. On the intrinsic bond supposed to
   See App. F(iv) for further discussion.          exist between hand and heart, see Michael
29 humours moods, dispositions. More lit-          Neill, ‘Amphitheaters in the Body: Play-
   erally, the four principal bodily ﬂuids         ing with Hands on the Shakespearian
   (blood, phlegm, choler or yellow bile, and      Stage’, in Putting History to the Question,
   melancholy or black bile) whose balance         pp. 167–203 (pp. 184–5).
   was supposed to determine one’s
   temperament.

                                            314
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   3.4

othello
  This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart:
  Hot, hot and moist! This hand of yours requires
  A sequester from liberty—fasting and prayer,
  Much castigation, exercise devout—
  For here’s a young and sweating devil here                                               40
  That commonly rebels. ’Tis a good hand,
  A frank one.
desdemona You may indeed say so;
  For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.
othello
  A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands,
  But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.                                                45
desdemona
  I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.

37 Hot, hot] f, q2; Not ~ q1 38 prayer] f; praying q 44 hearts . . . hands] f, q;
hands . . . hearts hanmer 46 Come now] f, q2; come, come q1



36 argues indicates                                lo’s sneer at the promiscuity of her ‘frank’
36, 44 liberal (a) free; (b) generous; (c)         hand by reminding him that this was the
   lascivious                                      hand that gave him her heart. Othello
37 hot By implication a sign of lustfulness;       then responds with further sarcasm:
   or simply ‘lustful’                             where at l. 31, he had taken her hand as
38 sequester shutting away (as in a prison         the sign of her liberal heart, he now sug-
   or nunnery). Accent on ﬁrst syllable.           gests that it’s the hand, since it allegedly
39 castigation chastisement                        gave away her heart, that deserves to be
   exercise disciplinary suffering; spiritual      called liberal; but where once lovers
   exercise, religious observance (OED n. 6c,      indeed gave each other their hands as a
   10a).                                           sign of their loving hearts, the new mode
40 sweating (a) labouring; (b) cf. hot and         is to give the hand alone with no commit-
   moist                                           ment from the heart. The ﬁgure recalls
41 commonly generally; but with a play             Iago’s sardonic references to wearing his
   on the sexual sense of ‘common’ (see            heart upon his sleeve (1.1.64) and to
   3.3.305).                                       Othello’s holding it in his hand (3.3.166).
42 frank Cf. liberal, l. 31.                       Warburton detected an allusion to the
44–5 The hearts . . . not hearts Cf.               Red Hand of Ulster, the heraldic badge
   William Cornwallis’s Essays (1601): ‘They       awarded by James I to members of his
   [our forefathers] had wont to give their        newly instituted order of baronets in
   hands and their hearts together; but we         1612; but this would require an unlikely
   think it a ﬁner grace to look asquint,          later insertion into both the F and Q
   our hand looking one way and our heart          manuscripts.
   another’ (Essay 28). Although Hanmer’s       45 heraldry . . . hearts Alliteration points
   emendation, which gives Othello’s lines         up the quibble on heart (in which r was
   an attractive chiastic balance, has been        still sounded) and heraldry (whose pro-
   widely accepted, the F and Q reading            nunciation is indicated by contemporary
   (which the Q2 editor saw no reason to           spellings of ‘herald’, which included
   change) makes good contextual sense: at         ‘heraud’, ‘harald’, and Ben Jonson’s
   l. 38 Desdemona seeks to counter Othel-         ‘harrot’).

                                            315
3.4                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello What promise, chuck?
desdemona
  I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
othello
  I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me:
  Lend me thy handkerchief.
desdemona                       Here, my lord.                                                50
othello
  That which I gave you.
desdemona                   I have it not about me.
othello Not?
desdemona No, faith, my lord.
othello
  That’s a fault: that handkerchief
  Did an Egyptian to my mother give;                                                          55
  She was a charmer and could almost read
  The thoughts of people; she told her, while she kept it
  ’Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
  Entirely to her love—but if she lost it,
  Or made a gift of it, my father’s eye                                                      60
  Should hold her loathèd, and his spirits should hunt
  After new fancies. She dying gave it me
  And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,
  To give it her. I did so; and, take heed on’t,
49 sorry] f; sullen q 53 faith] q1; indeed f, q2 59 Entirely . . . it] Repeated in q, at foot of
H4␯ and top of I1. 61 loathèd] f, q2; lothely q1 63 wived] f (wiu’d); wiue q

47 chuck Term of endearment, probably              54–64 that . . . her The veracity of this
   deriving from northern dialect chuck =             story may be called in question by
   chicken.                                           5.2.214–15, where Othello gives a differ-
49–95 I have a salt . . . ’Swounds Cf.                ent account of the origin of the handker-
   Giraldi, App. C, p. 442.                           chief, making it an instrument of his
49 salt . . . rheum running cold                      father’s power over his mother.
   sorry grievous; Q sullen = stubborn (but        55 Egyptian Perhaps = ‘gypsy’, since gypsies
   cf. also ‘sick-of-the-sullens’ = ill from bad      were supposed to come from Egypt (cf. the
   humour). Like bitter at 1.3.342, the more          description of Cleopatra as a ‘gypsy’,
   commonplace sorry seems an unlikely                Antony, 1.1.10); but Egypt was famously
   revision, but might represent a scribal            associated with magic.
   sophistication. On the other hand, Q’s          56 charmer enchanter
   sullen is the kind of substitution that         58 amiable desirable
   might easily be encouraged by the double        61 spirits vital power; can mean ‘semen’.
   alliteration with salt.                         62 fancies amorous inclinations, loves
50–4 Lend . . . that handkerchief One of           63 wived The suggestion of passivity (in the
   a number of dialogue passages where lin-           context of ‘fate’) makes F seem superior to
   eation is extremely problematic: it may be         Q’s ‘wive’.
   that the whole passage is best treated as
   prose.

                                               316
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   3.4

  Make it a darling like your precious eye:                                                  65
  To lose’t or give’t away were such perdition
  As nothing else could match.
desdemona                        Is’t possible?
othello
  ’Tis true; there’s magic in the web of it:
  A sybil, that had numbered in the world
  The sun to course two hundred compasses,                                                  70
  In her prophetic fury sewed the work;
  The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,
  And it was dyed in mummy, which the skilful
  Conserved of maidens’ hearts.
desdemona                          I’faith, is’t true?
othello
  Most veritable; therefore look to’t well.                                                  75
desdemona
  Then would to God that I had never seen’t!
othello Ha? Wherefore?

66 lose’t] f (loose’t); loose q 70 course] f, q2; make q1 73 which] f, q2; with q1
74 Conserved] f; Conserues q I’faith,] q1 (I’faith); Indeed? f; Indeed, q2 76 God] q;
Heauen f


65 Make . . . eye Cf. Dent E249.1: ‘To love         sibyl in Virgil’s Aeneid). Honigmann,
   as one’s own eye’.                               however, following Johnson’s gloss, ‘she
66 perdition (a) loss; (b) ruin, damnation          numbered the sun to course, to run . . . two
67 Is’t possible Cf. 2.3.275.                       hundred annual circuits’, understands
68–74 there’s . . . hearts Ironically the           Othello to say that the sibyl had prophe-
   story of the handkerchief seems to recall        sied that the world would end in two hun-
   just those ‘drugs’, ‘charms’, ‘spells and        dred years.
   medicines bought of mountebanks’ of           71 prophetic fury Hunter traced the phrase
   which Brabantio spoke in his accusations         to Sylvester ‘where it is frequent’, but
   of ‘witchcraft’ (1.1.170–2, 1.2.73–9,            Muir (Sources) plausibly suggests that the
   1.3.61–5).                                       whole passage imitates the description of
68 magic The magical qualities of the hand-         the pavilion magically woven by the
   kerchief are part of Shakespeare’s addi-         prophetess Cassandra in Ariosto’s Orlando
   tions to the story; in Giraldi it is simply      Furioso, 46.77–80; stanza 80 contains
   ‘a handkerchief–a gift from the Moor—            the phrase il furor profetico.
   which was must delicately embroidered in         work See 3.3.299.
   the Moorish fashion and much treasured        73 mummy ‘an unctuous liquid or gum used
   by the Lady and the Moor alike’ (App. C,         medicinally’ (OED n.1 1a). See App. F(iv)
   p. 441).                                         for a fuller note on the substance and its
   web warp; hence ‘weaving’.                       use.
69 sibyl prophetess                              74 maidens’ hearts Mummy prepared
69–70 that . . . compasses Usually inter-           from the remains of virgins was
   preted to mean she was two hundred               thought especially effective, including
   years old, extreme age being a frequent          as a charm against jealousy. See App.
   attribute of prophets (cf. the Cumaean           F(iv).

                                             317
3.4                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

desdemona
  Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
othello
  Is’t lost? Is’t gone? Speak, is it out o’th’ way?
desdemona Heaven bless us!                                                                     80
othello Say you?
desdemona
  It is not lost; but what an if it were?
othello How?
desdemona
  I say it is not lost.
othello                Fetch’t, let me see’t.
desdemona
  Why, so I can, sir; but I will not now:                                                      85
  This is a trick to put me from my suit—
  Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
othello
  Fetch me the handkerchief; my mind misgives.
desdemona
  Come, come: you’ll never meet a more sufﬁcient man—
othello
  The handkerchief !
desdemona               I pray talk me of Cassio—                                              90
othello
  The handkerchief !
desdemona               —a man that all his time
  Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,

78 rash] f, q2; rashly q1 80 Heaven] q1; not in f, q2 83 How?] f; Ha. q 85 sir] q; not
in f 87 Pray you] f; I pray q 88 the] f; that q 89–90 desdemona . . . handkerchief] q1;
not in f, q2


78 startingly with a start, by starts; impetu-       handkerchief makes it likely that F’s omis-
   ously (OED adv., citing this as the earliest      sion of ‘I pray . . . handkerchief’ (ll. 90–1)
   example)                                          was due to eye-skip. However, since either
   rash rashly, impetuously (OED, rash, adv.         of Desdemona’s speeches at ll. 89–90
   1)                                                can be construed as the ﬁrst part of a
79 out o’th’ way misplaced, missing                  sentence that continues in ll. 91–3, it
85 sir ‘This word creates a distance between         is possible that a deliberate cut was
   them’ (Honigmann), but it might also              involved, or even that Q preserves a can-
   be used playfully, and the rest of                celled alternative. Honigmann again
   Desdemona’s speech certainly attempts to          speculates on the possibility of interpola-
   lighten the tone.                                 tion by the Q compositor (cf. 1.3.367–71).
88 misgives is suspicious (full of misgivings)    89 sufﬁcient capable
89–91 Come . . . time The repetition of

                                              318
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  3.4

  Shared dangers with you—
othello
  The handkerchief !
desdemona             I’faith, you are to blame.
othello ’Swounds!                                                             Exit          95
emilia
  Is not this man jealous?
desdemona                   I ne’er saw this before.
  Sure, there’s some wonder in this handkerchief;
  I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
emilia
  ’Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
  They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;                                         100
  They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
  They belch us.
       Enter Iago and Cassio
                  Look you, Cassio and my husband.
iago
  There is no other way: ’tis she must do’t—
  And lo, the happiness! Go, and importune her.
94 I’faith] q1; Insooth f, q2 (In sooth) 95 ’Swounds] q1 (Zouns); Away f, q2 96 ne’er] q
(ne’re), f (neu’r) 98 the] f, q (corr.); this q (uncorr.)       of it] f, q2; not in q1
102 Enter . . . Cassio] f; after ‘loss of it’ (l. 93) q

96–102 I ne’er . . . belch us Cf. Giraldi,       101 hungerly Shakespeare’s usual equiva-
   App. C, p. 442.                                  lent of ‘hungrily’; an adverb derived from
97 wonder supernatural property                     ‘hunger’ rather than ‘hungry’.
98 unhappy (a) unlucky; (b) wretched             102 belch vomit up
99–102 ’Tis . . . us The deﬁant feminism            Enter . . . Cassio Q’s placing of this
   of Emilia’s speech is usually seen as an         entry has its attractions, since for Emilia
   implicit comment on Iago’s treatment             to make her denunciation of husbands
   of her; but it is not simply an expres-          while Iago is on the stage would create an
   sion of solidarity with Desdemona, since         effective dramatic irony while emphasiz-
   Emilia is covering up here: she has stood        ing the parallel between his attitude
   silently by during Othello’s increasingly        towards Emilia and Cassio’s dismissive
   frantic questioning and has elected not          treatment of Bianca at the end of this
   to reveal what she knows about the               scene. Emilia’s ‘look you’ would then
   handkerchief.                                    register anxiety that she might have been
99 a year or two Johnson thought this an            overheard. On the other hand, Q’s early
   indication that ‘the author intended the         entry may simply reﬂect the kind of
   action of this play to be considered as          anticipation that is common in copies
   longer than is marked by any note of             used by the playhouse book-holder, so-
   time’, though he was unable to ‘see any          called ‘prompt-books’ (cf. 4.2.89.1).
   vacuity into which a year or two, or even a   104 lo, the happiness! look, what good
   month or two, could be put’; see Intro-          luck! Luck of course doesn’t come into it,
   duction, pp. 33–6.                               since Iago has clearly stage-managed the
100 are . . . stomachs consist only of              encounter.
   appetite                                         importune Accent on second syllable.

                                             319
3.4                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

desdemona
  How now, good Cassio, what’s the news with you?                                            105
cassio
  Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
  That, by your virtuous means, I may again
  Exist and be a member of his love,
  Whom I, with all the ofﬁce of my heart,
  Entirely honour. I would not be delayed:                                                   110
  If my offence be of such mortal kind
  That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,
  Nor purposed merit in futurity
  Can ransom me into his love again—
  But to know so must be my beneﬁt;                                                          115
  So shall I clothe me in a forced content,
  And shut myself up in some other course
  To fortune’s alms.
desdemona            Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,
  My advocation is not now in tune:
  My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him,                                             120
  Were he in favour as in humour altered.
  So help me every spirit sanctiﬁed,
  As I have spoken for you all my best,
  And stood within the blank of his displeasure
  For my free speech! You must awhile be patient:                                            125

109 ofﬁce] f, q2; duty q1    112 nor my] f; neither q1; not my q2       117 shut] f, q2; shoote
q1


108 Exist . . . love i.e. as Christians experi-   115 to . . . beneﬁt simply knowing the
   enced their true being only through               worst must be my only reward
   Christ’s love and as members of his body;      117–18 shut . . . alms conﬁne myself to
   a piece of typically gallant hyperbole on         some other way of winning fortune’s
   Cassio’s part.                                    charity
109 ofﬁce . . . heart devoted service. Cas-       119 My advocation . . . tune this is not an
   sio’s elegant word-play tactfully suggests        appropriate moment for my advocacy
   that the exhibition of one kind of ofﬁce       121 favour appearance, countenance
   will restore him to another. But there is a       humour mood; but with a literal refer-
   sense in which, for him, the two kinds of         ence to the balance of physical ‘humours’
   service (l. 112) are genuinely inseparable.       thought to determine the temper of an
110 would not do not wish to be                      individual (see 3.4.29 n.).
111 mortal fatal; but with the hyperbolic         124 the blank Probably ‘point blank range’
   suggestion that his offence against Othello       (see J. R. Hale, ‘The True Shakespearean
   constitutes a mortal sin.                         Blank’, SQ 19 (1968), 33–40); but ‘blank’
113 purposed . . . futurity the merit I              could also refer to the ‘white’ at the centre
   mean to demonstrate in the future.                of the target (OED n. 2a; and cf.
   futurity Earliest citation in OED.                2.1.132–3).

                                              320
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   3.4

  What I can do, I will; and more I will
  Than for myself I dare. Let that sufﬁce you.
iago
  Is my lord angry?
emilia              He went hence but now,
  And certainly in strange unquietness.
iago
  Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon                                                  130
  When it hath blown his ranks into the air
  And, like the devil, from his very arm
  Puffed his own brother—and is he angry?
  Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
  There’s matter in’t indeed, if he be angry.                                              135
desdemona
  I prithee do so.                                  Exit Iago
                  Something sure of state—
  Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice
  Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him—
  Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases
  Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things,                                              140
  Though great ones are their object. ’Tis even so;
  For let our ﬁnger ache and it endues
  Our other, healthful members even to a sense
  Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
  Nor of them look for such observancy                                                     145

133 is he] f; can he be q 136 Exit Iago] f (‘Exit’, after l. 130); not in q 141 their] f; the
q 142 endues] f, q; subdues johnson conj.; induces keightley 143 a sense] f; that ~ q
145 observancy] f (obseruancie); obseruances q

129  unquietness agitation                          which Galenic medicine identiﬁed as the
133  Puffed (a) blown; (b) extinguished             source of all activity in the body. Imag-
134  moment importance                              ined as a pure ﬂuid, these spirits might
136  Something . . . state it must surely be        become fouled as a result of humoral
   some matter of public affairs                    disturbance: as Thomas Walkington
137 unhatched practice still concealed              expressed it, ‘where there is a fulness &
   plot. Desdemona’s metaphor resonates             repletion of infected and malignant
   ironically with Iago’s birth metaphors           humours . . . the subtle spirits be not only
   (see 1.3.392–3; 2.1.127–8; and cf.               tainted but even corrupted with puddle
   ll.156–7 below).                                 humours’ (The Opticke Glasse of Humors,
138 Made demonstrable made evident,                 1631 (repr. Delmar, NY, 1981), p. 103;
   exposed                                          emphasis added).
139 puddled muddied. As Paster points out        142 endues instructs, inducts; brings (into
   (see 2.1.192 n.), Desdemona’s language is        a certain state) (OED v. 3).
   not merely ﬁgurative: ‘spirit’ includes the   145 observancy respectful and ceremoni-
   so-called ‘animal spirits’, thought to be        ous attention
   ‘concocted out of blood and inspired air’,

                                             321
3.4                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  As ﬁts the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
  I was—unhandsome warrior as I am—
  Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
  But now I ﬁnd I had suborned the witness,
  And he’s indicted falsely.
emilia                       Pray heaven it be                                                  150
  State matters, as you think, and no conception
  Nor no jealous toy concerning you.
desdemona
  Alas the day! I never gave him cause.
emilia
  But jealous souls will not be answered so;
  They are not ever jealous for the cause,                                                      155
  But jealous for they’re jealous. It is a monster
  Begot upon itself, born on itself.
desdemona
  Heaven keep the monster from Othello’s mind.
emilia Lady, amen!
desdemona
  I will go seek him. Cassio, walk here about:                                                  160
  If I do ﬁnd him ﬁt, I’ll move your suit
  And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
cassio
  I humbly thank your ladyship.
                                Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia
        Enter Bianca


147 unhandsome warrior] f, q1 (uncorr.), q2; vnhandsome, ~ q1 (corr.) 158 the] f; that q
163.1 Exeunt . . . Emilia] q (opposite ll. 161–2); Exit f (after l. 162) 163.2 Enter Bianca] f; after
‘Cassio’ (l. 164) q



146 As . . . bridal as beﬁts the wedding day        152 jealous In this case F’s ‘jealious’
   itself                                              indicates the trisyllabic pronunciation
   Beshrew me may evil befall me (a mild               required by the metre.
   oath, often playfully used)                         toy foolish notion; triﬂe (OED a. 4–5)
147 unhandsome unskilful (OED a. 3, cit-            155–6 They . . . they’re jealous On the
   ing only this example; but the sense is             self-motivating nature of jealousy and
   easily derived from a. 2, ‘ill-adapted’).           envy, see Neill, ‘Places’, p. 218.
148 unkindness unnatural cruelty                    156–7 monster . . . born on itself Cf. the
149 suborned corrupted                                 ‘monstrous birth’ of Iago’s imagination
150–2 Pray . . . you Emilia’s anxiety about            (1.3.392–3) and his description of the self-
   her deceit shows through these lines.               devouring nature of jealousy, ‘the green-
151 conception Cf. ll. 156–7.                          eyed monster’ (3.3.169).

                                               322
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   3.4

bianca
  ’Save you, friend Cassio.
cassio                       What make you from home?
  How is’t with you, my most fair Bianca?                                                  165
  I’faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
bianca
  And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
  What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights?
  Eight-score eight hours? And lovers’ absent hours
  More tedious than the dial eight-score times!                                            170
  O weary reckoning!
cassio                   Pardon me, Bianca:
  I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed;
  But I shall in a more continuate time
  Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
  Take me this work out.
        jHe gives her Desdemona’s handkerchief k
bianca                      O Cassio, whence came this?                                    175
  This is some token from a newer friend.
  To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
  Is’t come to this? Well, well.
cassio                           Go to, woman!
  Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth,
  From whence you have them. You are jealous now                                           180


166 I’faith] q1; Indeed f, q2 171 O] f (Oh), q2; No q1 172 leaden] f, q2; laden q1
173 continuate] f, q2; conuenient q1 175 He gives . . . handkerchief ] rowe (subs.); not in f, q
176–7 friend. | To . . . absence now] after q1 (friend, | To . . . absence, now); Friend, |
To . . . Absence: now f; friend | To . . . absence, now q2 178 Well, well] f, q2; not in q1



168–9 What . . . eight hours An impor-               idea of pressing with heavy weights,
   tant passage for those concerned with             a form of torture commonly used to
   the play’s ‘double-time scheme’, since            extract confessions from recalcitrant
   Othello and his party seem to have                prisoners.
   spent no more than a single night in           173 continuate uninterrupted.
   Cyprus. See Introduction, pp. 33–6.            174 Strike . . . score discharge this debt
170 dial clock                                       (picking up the second sense of Bianca’s
171 reckoning (a) counting; (b) account;             reckoning)
   (c) settling of accounts, judgement, pun-      175 Take me . . . out Ethic dative: ‘copy
   ishment, revenge                                  this embroidery for me’. The eagerness of
172 leaden as heavy as lead, burdensome,             both Cassio and Emilia to copy its design
   depressing                                        indicates the rare and luxurious quality of
   pressed oppressed. But, as Sanders                the handkerchief.
   points out, there is also a play on the        176 friend mistress

                                             323
3.4                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  That this is from some mistress, some remembrance—
  No, by my faith, Bianca.
bianca                       Why, whose is it?
cassio
  I know not neither: I found it in my chamber.
  I like the work well: ere it be demanded—
  As like enough it will—I would have it copied.                                       185
  Take it and do’t, and leave me for this time.
bianca Leave you? Wherefore?
cassio
  I do attend here on the general,
  And think it no addition nor my wish
  To have him see me womaned.
bianca                              Why, I pray you?                                   190
cassio
  Not that I love you not.
bianca                     But that you do not love me.
  I pray you bring me on the way a little,
  And say if I shall see you soon at night.
cassio
  ’Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
  For I attend here; but I’ll see you soon.                                            195
bianca
  ’Tis very good—I must be circumstanced!             Exeunt


182 by my faith] q1; in good troth f, q2 183 neither] f; sweete q   190–1 Why . . . not] f,
q2; not in q1 196 Exeunt] q; Exeunt omnes. f




181 remembrance keepsake, love-token (cf.         metaphorically to mean ‘advantage to my
   Hamlet, 3.1.95, ‘I have remembrances of        honour’.
   yours’)                                     190 womaned accompanied by a woman,
183 not neither Double negatives were             and thereby effeminated. The misogyny
   commonly used as intensiﬁers in 17th-          revealed in Cassio’s turn of phrase, which
   century English as they still are in some      contrasts so extremely with his courtly
   modern dialects.                               compliments to Desdemona (‘The riches
188 attend here on wait for (but with an          of the ship is come on shore’, 2.1.83), is
   additional hint of ‘am in attendance on’       disquietingly like Iago’s.
   that ﬂatters Cassio’s masculine self-       194 bring accompany
   importance)                                 196 circumstanced A unique usage (OED).
189 addition A heraldic term, meaning             It seems to mean something like ‘forced to
   something added to a coat of arms as a         submit to circumstances’ or even ‘fobbed
   badge of honour (OED n. 5); here used          off with circumstances’.

                                           324
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                         4.1

4.1      Enter Iago and Othello
iago
  Will you think so?
othello                Think so, Iago?
iago                                   What,
  To kiss in private?
othello               An unauthorized kiss!
iago
  Or to be naked with her friend in bed
  An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
othello
  Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?                                                              5
  It is hypocrisy against the devil.
  They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
  The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
iago
  If they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip;
  But if I give my wife a handkerchief—
othello                                   What then?                                                10

4.1] f (Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.), q2 (Actus 4. Scoena 1.); Actus 4. q1     0.1 Enter . . . Othello]
q; Enter Othello, and Iago. f 3, 5 in bed] f; abed q 9 If] f; So q

4.1 The prompt-books of Edmund Kean                      lovers sometimes contrived to share a
   (London, 1831) and J. W. Wallack (New                 bed whilst remaining sexually innocent.
   York, 1837) indicate that this scene was              In the Arthurian cycle, for example,
   frequently cut in the 19th century, pre-              Lancelot and Guinevere temporarily pre-
   sumably because it was felt to compro-                serve their chastity by sleeping with a
   mise Othello’s heroic stature (Folger                 naked sword between them.
   Othello Promptbooks 17 and 7). The open-          6   hypocrisy . . . devil ‘as common hypo-
   ing of the scene mirrors that of 1.1: Iago            crites cheat men by seeming good, and yet
   once again enters in the middle of an                 living wickedly, these men would cheat
   agitated conversation with a gull whom                the devil, by giving him ﬂattering hopes,
   he is leading by the nose. In each case               and at last avoiding the crime which he
   the Q direction implies that Iago                     thinks them ready to commit’ (Johnson).
   should enter ﬁrst: this seems especially              Against also implies that their actions con-
   appropriate here, where the reversal of               stitute       a     challenge     to       the
   the normal order of social precedence                 devil: it is as unwise to tempt him as it is to
   would make a strong dramatic point, act-              ‘tempt heaven’.
   ing out the role-reversal foreshadowed            8   The devil . . . heaven The injunction
   at 1.1.42–4 (‘I follow him to serve my                against tempting God is a biblical com-
   turn upon him. | We cannot all be                     monplace; see esp. Matthew 4: 7, where
   masters, nor all masters | Cannot be truly            Jesus rebukes the temptations of the
   followed’).                                           devil: ‘It is written again, Thou shalt not
 1 Think so, Iago? Mirroring the role-                   tempt the Lord thy God.’
   reversal referred to above, Othello seems        9    venial slip pardonable error.
   to have picked up Iago’s habit of inter-        10    What then This can be treated as com-
   rogative echoing from 3.3.                            pleting a hexameter with the last line
3–4 naked . . . harm Honigmann notes the                 of Iago’s speech (in which case quick,
   romance convention according to which                 nervous cueing is involved) or as an

                                               325
4.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago
  Why then ’tis hers, my lord; and, being hers,
  She may, I think, bestow’t on any man.
othello
  She is protectress of her honour too:
  May she give that?
iago
  Her honour is an essence that’s not seen,                                                 15
  They have it very oft that have it not.
  But, for the handkerchief—
othello
  By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it!
  Thou saidst—O, it comes o’er my memory
  As doth the raven o’er the infectious house:                                             20
  Boding to all—he had my handkerchief.
iago
  Ay—what of that?
othello                That’s not so good now.
iago                                           What
  If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
  Or heard him say—as knaves be such abroad
  Who, having by their own importunate suit                                                 25
  Or voluntary dotage of some mistress
  Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose
  But they must blab—
othello                  Hath he said anything?
20 infectious] f; infected q 26 Or] f, q2; Or by the q1     27 Convincèd] f (Conuinced), q1
(corr.), q2; Coniured q1 (uncorr.)

   incomplete line on its own, requiring sig-    22 Ay . . . What Like ll. 1 and 32, a virtuoso
   niﬁcant pausing. Either would be dramat-         example of the dramatic effect that can be
   ically effective.                                created by the quick cueing required by a
                                                    shared line. Particularly riveting here is
20–1 raven . . . Boding The raven was a             the ‘What’ with which Iago pounces on
   bird of ill-omen (Dent R33, ‘The croaking        the end of Othello’s line, followed by the
   raven bodes misfortune’), and sometimes          briefest of teasing pauses, before he goes
   associated with the spread of diseases like      on to explain what he has in mind.
   the plague. In Marlowe’s The Jew of Malta,    24 as . . . abroad as there are villains
   for example, Barabas compares himself to         around
   ‘the sad presaging raven that tolls | The     26 voluntary dotage willing infatuation
   sick man’s passport . . . And . . . Doth      27 Convincèd or supplied conquered
   shake contagion from her sable wings’;           (OED, convince, v. 1) or satisﬁed sexually
   cf. also Macbeth, 1.5.37–9, and Hamlet,          (Rubinstein, p. 264). The verbs refer back
   3.2.241–2.                                       to importunate suit and voluntary dotage
20 infectious full of infection                     respectively.

                                             326
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                      4.1

iago
  He hath, my lord, but be you well assured,
  No more than he’ll unswear.
othello                           What hath he said?                                             30
iago
  Faith, that he did—I know not what he did.
othello
  What? What?
iago              Lie.
othello                With her?
iago                         With her, on her—what you will.
othello Lie with her? Lie on her? We say ‘lie on her’ when
  they belie her. Lie with her? ’Swounds, that’s fulsome!
  Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief? To confess,                                             35
  and be hanged for his labour? First to be hanged and then
  to confess! I tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself
  in such shadowing passion without some instruction. It
  is not words that shakes me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and
  lips! Is’t possible? Confess? Handkerchief ? O, devil!                                         40
        He falls down in a trance
31 Faith,] q1; Why f, q2 what he did] q, f; what. He did—honigmann 32 What? What?]
f; But what? q1; What? q2 34 ’Swounds] q1 (Zouns); not in f, q2 35–40 To . . . devil] f,
q2; not in q1 40.1 He . . . trance] f (Falls in a Traunce.), q2; He fals downe. q1 (corr.); not in q1
(uncorr.)

32 what you will An offhand colloquial              35–6 confess . . . hanged Proverbial (Dent
   phrase (Dent W280.5) that supplied the              C587; OED, confess, v. 10), an offensive
   subtitle for Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night            way of ‘giving the lie’ (see 3.4.1); here
   and the title for one of Marston’s plays.           meant more literally, but triggered by
   Iago may give it an additional cruel twist,         association with the puns on ‘lie’.
   however, by quibbling on will (= sexual          36–7 First . . . confess Cf. Dent L590, ‘First
   desire), thus returning Othello to the tor-         hang and draw, and then hear the cause’,
   menting voyeurism of the temptation                 referring to so-called ‘Lydford Law’,
   scene (3.3.396–410).                                named after a small village in Devon noto-
33–40 Lie . . . devil Othello’s emotional              rious for lynchings.
   breakdown is signalled both by his col-          38 shadowing preﬁguring, ominous (OED
   lapse into prose, and by the disintegration         ppl. a. 2).
   of his syntax. ‘At this late stage in the           passion violent attack or ﬁt of a disease
   play, Othello is the only character who             (OED n. 4b), referring to tremble.
   has never been heard speaking in prose:             instruction solid information
   in poetic-dramatic terms that measures           39–40 Noses . . . lips ‘surrogate genital
   the catastrophic descent’ (Bradshaw, p.             images’ (Honigmann); but perhaps also
   224).                                               frantic images of dismemberment, as
33 We . . . her Othello tries to salvage some          Steevens suggested. Cf. ll.137–8, 193.
   comfort from the habitual ambiguities of         40 Is’t possible Repeats Iago’s question at
   Iago’s speech: lie on her can mean ‘tell lies       2.3.276. Coming at the very moment of
   about (belie) her’.                                 the collapse that conﬁrms Othello’s trans-
34 fulsome lustful; obscene, disgusting,               formation into the instrument of Iago’s
   morally repugnant (OED a. 2c, 6)                    plot, the echo creates a terrible irony.

                                               327
4.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago
  Work on, my medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are
     caught,
  And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
  All guiltless, meet reproach. What ho, my lord!
  My lord, I say! Othello!
       Enter Cassio
                           How now, Cassio!
cassio What’s the matter?                                                                    45
iago
  My lord is fallen into an epilepsy—
  This is his second ﬁt; he had one yesterday.
cassio
  Rub him about the temples.
iago                            No, forbear:
  The lethargy must have his quiet course;
  If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by                                                  50
  Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.
  Do you withdraw yourself a little while:
  He will recover straight; when he is gone,
  I would on great occasion speak with you.
                                                Exit Cassio
  How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?                                           55
othello
  Dost thou mock me?

41 medicine, work] q (worke); Medicine workes f 44.1 Enter Cassio] f; after ‘Cassio!’ q      48
No, forbear] q; not in f 54.1 Exit Cassio] rowe; not in f, q1; after ‘mock me’ (l. 56) q2


43 my lord At this point Simon Russell           47 This . . . yesterday Iago is presumably
   Beale’s Iago registered his triumph over         lying to cover his tracks: there is no other
   his prostrate commander with a con-              reference to a previous ﬁt, nor is there any
   temptuous kick.                                  evidence that Othello is epileptic, unless
44 Othello The ﬁrst and only time that Iago         we take his violent headache in 3.3 to be a
   directly addresses his general by name, an       symptom. Cf. 3.3.287.
   impertinence he can risk only because         48 No, forbear Iago’s words were almost
   Othello is unconscious (cf. 3.3.467).            certainly omitted from F by a careless
44–177 How now . . . hurts my hand                  compositor or scribe, since they complete
   This section of the scene was cut by             Cassio’s line, which is three syllables
   Salvini on the grounds that Othello’s role       short.
   as passive eavesdropper is incompatible       49 lethargy morbid drowsiness
   ‘with a man of the Moor’s violent and         54 great occasion matter of great
   haughty temper. Would you not suppose            importance
   that he would spring like a tiger on Cassio   55 hurt your head Deliberately ambiguous,
   and tear him to pieces?’ (cited in Furness,      since it may refer to the headache caused
   p. 237).                                         by the cuckold’s horns (cf. 3.3.287)

                                             328
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.1

iago                     I mock you not, by heaven!
  Would you would bear your fortune like a man.
othello
  A hornèd man’s a monster and a beast.
iago
  There’s many a beast then in a populous city,
  And many a civil monster.                                                                  60
othello
  Did he confess it?
iago                  Good sir, be a man:
  Think every bearded fellow that’s but yoked
  May draw with you. There’s millions now alive
  That nightly lie in those unproper beds,
  Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.                                        65
  O, ’tis the spite of hell, the ﬁend’s arch-mock,
  To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
  And to suppose her chaste. No, let me know;
  And, knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
othello
  O, thou art wise; ’tis certain.
iago                               Stand you a while apart;                                  70

56 you . . . heaven!] f; you? no by Heauen, q 57 fortune] f; fortunes q 61 confess it] f;
confesse q Good] f, q1 (corr.); God q1 (uncorr.) 64 lie] f (lye), q2; lyes q1 67 couch] f
(Cowch), q2; Coach q1 69 what she shall] f, q; what shall steevens conj.


58 A hornèd . . . beast Cf. Dent C876.2, ‘A       67 lip kiss (ﬁrst recorded use in OED)
   cuckold is a beast’; Othello’s alteration of      secure free from anxiety, doubt, or
   the proverb links the cuckold’s horns to          suspicion
   the motif of unnatural deformity.              68–9 let . . . be Another of Iago’s obscurely
60 civil monster Apart from its recollection         portentous remarks, whose obliquity
   of Iago’s insinuations about the sexual           prompted Steevens to propose that she
   mores of Venetian wives (3.3.205–7), this         was corrupt and redundant. It seems to
   phrase is an oxymoronic gloss on what it          mean something like: ‘Let me know for
   means to be a ‘Moor of Venice’. Civil = (a)       certain, and then, recognizing my own
   city-dwelling; (b) civilized. Monsters, of        frailty, I shall understand her true nature
   course, belong to the uncivil wilderness          well enough.’ But the heavy rhetorical
   beyond the bounds of the city (polis).            emphasis on know matters more than
61 be a man Honigmann compares Iago’s                the precise meaning; indeed, the ob-
   patronizing reproofs to Roderigo: ‘the            scurity is surely part of Iago’s strategy of
   phrase helps to unman Othello’.                   mystiﬁcation.
62 bearded fellow mature man                      70 ’tis certain May refer either to Iago’s
62–3 yoked . . . draw i.e. as an ox is yoked         wisdom, or to Desdemona’s inﬁdelity.
   to draw the plough. An insulting quibble          Stand . . . apart Honigmann notes the
   on the ‘yoke’ of matrimony.                       use of a stock ‘comedy routine [in which]
64 unproper not exclusively theirs; com-             a victim is tricked into overhearing what
   mon (OED a. 4; citing only this example)          others want him to overhear’; cf. Much
65 peculiar their own private property               Ado, 2.3 and 3.1.

                                              329
4.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Conﬁne yourself but in a patient list:
  Whilst you were here, o’erwhelmèd with your grief—
  A passion most unsuiting such a man—
  Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
  And laid good ’scuse upon your ecstasy;                                                       75
  Bade him anon return and here speak with me—
  The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
  And mark the ﬂeers, the gibes, and notable scorns
  That dwell in every region of his face.
  For I will make him tell the tale anew:                                                      80
  Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
  He hath, and is again to cope your wife.
  I say, but mark his gesture—marry, patience!
  Or I shall say you’re all in all in spleen,
  And nothing of a man.
othello                    Dost thou hear, Iago?                                                85
  I will be found most cunning in my patience,
  But—dost thou hear?—most bloody.
iago                                       That’s not amiss;
  But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
        Othello withdraws
  Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
  A hussy that by selling her desires                                                          90

72 o’erwhelmèd] f, q2; ere while, mad q1 73 unsuiting] q1 (corr.) (vnsuting); resulting f;
vnﬁtting q1 (uncorr.), q2 75 ’scuse] q; scuses f 76 Bade] f (Bad), q2; Bid q1 return] f;
retire q 77 Do but] f; but q 78 ﬂeers, the gibes] f; Ieeres, the Iibes q1 (corr.); geeres,
the gibes q1 (uncorr.), q2 82 hath] f; has q 88.1 Othello withdraws] rowe; not in f, q
90 hussy] oxford; Huswife f, q

71 in . . . list Usually glossed ‘within the       78 ﬂeers sneers, gibes (earliest use in OED)
   bounds of self-control’ (OED, list, n.3,        82 cope encounter; with a strong sexual
   8a); but list = ‘listening’ (n.1) and list         innuendo, perhaps inﬂuenced by cope =
   = ‘desire’ (n.4 2) may also be involved.           cover. See Williams, Glossary, p. 81.
74 shifted him away got him out of the way         83 gesture behaviour, manner
   (OED v. 16; citing this as earliest ex-         84 all in spleen completely overwhelmed by
   ample). In this context shift = ‘practise          violent rage
   shifts, evasions, or fraud’ may also be rele-   85 nothing . . . man Cf. l. 61.
   vant (v. 6).                                    86 patience Othello (in Iago’s own fashion)
75 ecstasy condition of being outside or              twists the meaning of Iago’s word from
   beside oneself (OED n. 1), i.e. Othello’s ﬁt.      ‘long-suffering’ to ‘willingness to wait
76 anon presently                                     [for my revenge]’.
77 encave hide, as in a cave or cellar. There      88 keep time in all control yourself. A stock
   is perhaps a distant echo of the savage            musical metaphor: Dent T308.1.
   landscape of Othello’s travel narrative         89–163 Now will . . . no more Cf. Giraldi,
   (‘antres vast’, 1.3.140). For further com-         App. C, p. 441.
   ment on this apparent coinage (OED), see        90 hussy As at 1.3.270 and 2.1.112 (see
   Neill, ‘Opening’, pp. 155–9.                       notes), it is almost impossible for an editor

                                               330
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.1

  Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature
  That dotes on Cassio—as ’tis the strumpet’s plague
  To beguile many, and be beguiled by one.
  He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
  From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.                                                 95
       Enter Cassio
  As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;
  And his unbookish jealousy must construe
  Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behaviours
  Quite in the wrong.—How do you now, lieutenant?
cassio
  The worser that you give me the addition                                                  100
  Whose want even kills me.
iago
  Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on’t:
  (Speaking lower) Now, if this suit lay in Bianca’s power,
  How quickly should you speed!
cassio Alas, poor caitiff !                                                                 105
othello (aside) Look how he laughs already.
iago
  I never knew a woman love man so.
91 clothes] q (cloathes); Cloath f 94 restrain] f; refraine q 95.1 Enter Cassio] f; after
‘one’ (l. 93) q 97 construe] after q (conster); conserue f 98 behaviours] f; behauiour q
99 now] q; not in f 103 Speaking lower] rowe; not in f, q power] q; dowre f 107 a] q;
not in f

   to decide whether to print hussy or house-      98 light frivolous. But, because it can
   wife here, since both meanings of F and Q          also mean ‘unchaste’, the word itself
   huswife are involved, even though the              wittily epitomizes Othello’s problem of
   insulting hussy (= prostitute) is Iago’s pri-      ‘construing’.
   mary sense.                                     100 addition title. The malicious pleasure
   her desires Probably an objective geni-            which Iago takes in persistently address-
   tive (see 3.3.220): = others’ desire of her.       ing Cassio by the rank of which he has
                                                      deprived him gives the lie to those critics
93 To beguile . . . one Cf. Dent D179, ‘He            who, arguing that Iago’s complaints in
   that deceives (beguiles) another is oft            1.1 are soon forgotten, like Coleridge
   deceived (beguiled) himself’.                      attribute them to ‘the motive-hunting of
97 unbookish First recorded use (OED). Cf.            motiveless malignity’ (see Introduction,
   Iago’s sneer at Cassio for being ‘bookish’         p. 31).
   (1.1.23).                                       102 Ply importune, work away at
   construe interpret; with a play on the             sure on’t sure to be reinstated
   technical application of the term to Greek      104 speed attain your desire
   and Latin translation, suggested by             105 Alas . . . caitiff Metrically amphibious.
   unbookish. F’s conserue suggests that the          caitiff wretch. Expressing affection, like
   copy may have read construe, though Q’s            rogue (l. 108), but with an edge of patron-
   conster conforms to what seems to have             izing disdain.
   been Shakespeare’s preferred spelling of
   the verb.

                                               331
4.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

cassio
  Alas, poor rogue! I think i’faith she loves me.
othello (aside)
  Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
iago
  Do you hear, Cassio?
othello (aside)           Now he importunes him                                           110
  To tell it o’er. Go to, well said, well said!
iago
  She gives it out that you shall marry her.
  Do you intend it?
cassio Ha, ha, ha!
othello (aside)
  Do you triumph, Roman, do you triumph?                                                  115
cassio I marry—what, a customer? Prithee bear some
  charity to my wit; do not think it so unwholesome. Ha,
  ha, ha!
othello (aside) So, so, so, so: they laugh that wins.
iago Faith, the cry goes that you marry her.                                              120
cassio Prithee say true.
108 i’faith] q1; indeed f, q2 111 o’er] f; on q          well said, well said] f; well said q
115 you . . . Roman] q; ye . . . Romaine f; you . . . rogue warburton conj.; you . . . o’er me
collier MS conj. 116 I . . . Prithee] f; I marry her? I prethee q1; I marry her? what? a
Customer; I prethee q2 119 they] f, q2; not in q1 120 Faith,] q1; Why Ÿ f; Why, q2
that you] f; you shall q1; that you shall q2

109 faintly feebly, without conviction              gested ‘Roman’ to a puzzled scribe at some
   out off                                          point in the transmission of the text (see
111 well said well done (need not imply that        Honigmann, Texts, chap. 9). It is also pos-
   Othello actually overhears)                      sible that ‘Roman’, like Veronese (2.1.27),
112 marry her Bianca’s boasts may account           represents an unresolved confusion in
   for Iago’s description of Cassio as ‘almost      Shakespeare’s mind about the exact
   damned in a fair wife’ (1.1.20), if we           nature of Cassio’s foreignness.
   assume that Bianca, as Bradshaw argues        116 customer prostitute (a much more con-
   (pp. 154–6), has accompanied her lover           temptuous term than courtesan, the
   from Venice.                                     description given of Bianca in F’s ‘The
115 Roman It is not easy to see the reason for      Names of the Actors’); perhaps a nonce
   this epithet: perhaps it has been suggested      or regional usage, since OED’s only other
   to Othello’s increasingly fevered imagina-       example is also Shakespearian, and
   tion by an odd linkage between the Roman         comes from a play written fairly soon after
   associations of ‘triumph’ (the triumphal         Othello, All’s Well (5.3.288).
   procession through the streets of Rome        116–17 bear . . . wit give some credit to my
   allowed to a victorious general) with the        judgement.
   contemporary notion of Rome as ‘a city        117 unwholesome morally tainted; but in
   notorious for sexual vice’ (Williams, Dic-       the context of customer there is inevitably
   tionary, p. 1167). But Warburton and             a play on the literal sense, ‘diseased’.
   Collier may have been right in supposing      119 wins The singular verb was probably in
   corruption at this point, and the associa-       ﬂuenced by the wording of the proverb
   tions of triumph may simply have sug-            ‘He laughs that wins’ (Dent L 93).

                                             332
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.1

iago I am a very villain else.
othello (aside) Have you scored me? Well.
cassio This is the monkey’s own giving out: she is
  persuaded I will marry her, out of her own love and                                       125
  ﬂattery, not out of my promise.
othello (aside) Iago beckons me: now he begins the story.
cassio She was here even now; she haunts me in every
  place. I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with
  certain Venetians, and thither comes the bauble: by this                                  130
  hand, she falls thus about my neck—
       jCassio embraces Iagok
othello (aside) Crying ‘O dear Cassio!’ as it were: his
  gesture imports it.
cassio So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so shakes,
  and pulls me—ha, ha, ha!                                                                  135



123 Have . . . Well] f, q2; Ha you stor’d me well q1 127 beckons] q; becomes f 129 the
other] f; tother q 130 the bauble] f; this ~ q 130–1 by . . . falls] q1; and falls me f; fals
me q2 131.1 Cassio . . . Iago] This edition; not in f, q 134 shakes] f; hales q




122–204 I am . . . midnight In accordance         127 Iago beckons It may be, as the Oxford
   with the comic decorum of its cuckold-            direction indicates, that Othello should
   gulling convention (see above, l. 70 n.)          draw closer at this point; but beckon could
   this section of the scene lapses into a           refer to signalling of any kind and Iago
   prose idiom that includes even the habitu-        may simply be gesturing for him to pay
   al verse-speaker, Othello.                        close attention. As Honigmann points out
123 scored wounded, branded. Score could             F’s becomes is an easy misreading for such
   also mean ‘achieve sexual conquest’               variant spellings as ‘becons’.
   (Williams, Glossary, p. 269), and if it is     129 sea-bank sea-shore
   read this way, then me should perhaps be       130 bauble plaything, trinket; contemptu-
   taken as an ethic dative; or perhaps, since       ously applied to women (see Williams,
   ‘husband and wife is one ﬂesh’, Othello           Dictionary, p. 79); foolish or childish
   merely thinks of Desdemona’s conquered            person (OED n. 5b).
   body as an extension of his own. Honig-        130–1 by this hand Innocuous assevera-
   mann defends Q’s stored on the grounds            tion, but purged from F and Q2 along with
   that store ‘could mean to provide for the         more serious oaths; for details linking this
   continuance of a stock or breed’, in which        with the practice of Ralph Crane, see
   case Othello would mean ‘Have you                 Honigmann, Texts, p. 166.
   begotten children for me?’; but Q2 evi-        131–131.1 thus . . . embraces Iago What
   dently found the word puzzling, and a             Othello sees at this point will resemble a
   simple misreading seems more likely.              mimed re-enactment of Cassio’s dream
124 monkey A term of playful contempt                (3.3.415–27), its confusing displacements
   (OED n. 2b) used especially of children           further complicated by the fact that
   and young women (cf. Macbeth, 4.2.60;             Cassio will seem to play the part of
   Jonson, Devil is an Ass, 2.8.83). In this         Desdemona, while Iago takes the place
   context the use of monkeys as an emblem           of Cassio.
   of lust must also be relevant (cf. 3.3.405).   133 imports betokens

                                              333
4.1                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello (aside) Now he tells how she plucked him to my
  chamber. O, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I
  shall throw it to.
cassio Well, I must leave her company.
iago Before me, look where she comes!                                                    140
        Enter Bianca
cassio ’Tis such another ﬁtchew—marry, a perfumed one!
  What do you mean by this haunting of me?
bianca Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you
  mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now?
  I was a ﬁne fool to take it! I must take out the work?—A                               145
  likely piece of work, that you should ﬁnd it in your
  chamber and know not who left it there! This is some
  minx’s token—and I must take out the work? There, give
  it your hobby-horse!
        jShe throws down the handkerchief k
  Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no work on’t.                                    150
cassio How now, my sweet Bianca? How now? How
  now?
othello (aside) By heaven, that should be my handkerchief.
bianca If you’ll come to supper tonight, you may; if you
  will not, come when you are next prepared for.        Exit                              155


137 O] f; not in q 140 iago] f, q1; not in q2 140.1 Enter Bianca] f; after ‘company’ (l. 139)
q 141 cassio] f; not in q ﬁtchew] f, q2; ﬁcho q1 marry, a perfumed one!] hart; marry
a perfum’d one? f; marry a perfum’d one, q 145 work] f, q2; whole worke q1 147 know
not] f; not know q 149 your] f; the q 149.1 She . . . handkerchief ] This edition; not in f, q
154 If . . . if ] f; An . . . an q


137 nose For the nose as penis-surrogate,           i.e. whore (OED, polecat, n. 2; Williams,
   see Partridge, p. 154, Williams, Diction-        Glossary, pp. 127, 241–2)
   ary, pp. 954–6, Glossary, pp. 218–19.            perfumed Cf. Tilley P461, ‘To stink like a
   The Elizabethan Homily ‘Against                  polecat’.
   Whoredom and Adultery’ cites amputa-          143 devil and his dam Cf. Dent D225.
   tion of the nose as a form of punishment         dam mother. Usually contemptuous and
   for adultery among the ancient Egyp-             typically used of animals; see OED n.2 2,
   tians, a penalty still extant in some            3.
   Islamic codes.                                145 I must . . . work See 3.3.299.
140 Before me Mild asseveration, ‘perhaps        146 likely . . . work likely business (im-
   formed on the analogy of “before God” ’          probable story).
   (Honigmann).                                  148 minx See 3.3.475.
141 such another ‘like all the rest of them’     149 hobby-horse whore. See Williams, Dic-
   (Ridley). A mocking but often playfully          tionary, pp. 669–70, Glossary, pp. 158–9;
   affectionate phrase; cf. Troilus, 1.2.254,       Partridge, p. 121.
   267.                                          155 when . . . for when I next prepare sup-
   ﬁtchew polecat (notorious for lechery),          per for you (i.e. never)

                                            334
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    4.1

iago After her, after her!
cassio Faith, I must; she’ll rail in the streets else.
iago Will you sup there?
cassio Faith, I intend so.
iago Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain                                   160
  speak with you.
cassio Prithee come—will you?
iago Go to, say no more.                             Exit Cassio
othello (coming forward) How shall I murder him, Iago?
iago Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?                                           165
othello O, Iago!
iago And did you see the handkerchief?
othello Was that mine?
iago Yours, by this hand! And to see how he prizes the
  foolish woman your wife: she gave it him, and he hath                                     170
  given it his whore.
othello I would have him nine years a-killing. A ﬁne
  woman, a fair woman, a sweet woman!
iago Nay, you must forget that.
othello Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight,                                   175
  for she shall not live! No, my heart is turned to stone:
        jHe beats his breastk
  I strike it, and it hurts my hand. O, the world hath not a
  sweeter creature: she might lie by an emperor’s side, and
  command him tasks.
iago Nay, that’s not your way.                                                              180
othello Hang her, I do but say what she is: so delicate with
  her needle, an admirable musician—O, she will sing the
157 Faith] q1; not in f, q2        streets] f; streete q 159 Faith] q1; Yes f, q2 163 Exit
Cassio] q; not in f 164 coming forward] This edition (after capell); not in f, q 169–
71 Yours . . . whore] f; not in q (which prints only preﬁx, as catchword) 174 that] f, q2; not in
q1 175 Ay] f (I); And q 176.1 He beats his breast] This edition; not in f, q 177 hath] f;
has q

160 I . . . fain I very much desire to            169 by this hand Sanders notes ‘the quibble
163 Go to come, come                                 by means of which Iago makes the com-
164–206 How . . . Excellent good Cf.                 mon oath the literal truth’.
   Giraldi, App. C, p. 443.                       176 heart . . . stone Cf. Dent H311, ‘A
169–71 Yours . . . whore This speech is              heart of stone’, and SS24, ‘To stone one’s
   omitted from the quartos, but Q1 includes         heart’; echoed at 5.2.65.
   the preﬁx as a catchword at the bottom of      180 not your way no way to think
   sig. K1, indicating that it was inadver-
   tently dropped by the compositor. Cf.
   2.3.269–71.

                                              335
4.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  savageness out of a bear—of so high and plenteous wit
  and invention!
iago She’s the worse for all this.                                                        185
othello O, a thousand thousand times! And then of so
  gentle a condition—
iago Ay, too gentle.
othello Nay, that’s certain—but yet the pity of it, Iago; O
  Iago, the pity of it, Iago!                                                             190
iago If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to
  offend; for if it touch not you, it comes near nobody.
othello I will chop her into messes—cuckold me?
iago O, ’tis foul in her.
othello With mine ofﬁcer!                                                                 195
iago That’s fouler.
othello Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I’ll not
  expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide
  my mind again. This night, Iago.
iago Do it not with poison; strangle her in her bed, even the                             200
  bed she hath contaminated.
othello Good, good, the justice of it pleases, very good.
iago And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker: you shall
  hear more by midnight.
othello
  Excellent good.
       Trumpet sounds within

186 O] f; not in q a . . . times] q; a thousand, a thousand times f 189 Nay] f, q2; I
q1 189–90 O . . . Iago] f; the pitty q1; oh the pitty q2 191 are] f; be q 192 touch] f;
touches q 198 night. I’ll] f (Ile); night I’le q 205.1 Trumpet . . . within] dyce; ‘A Trumpet.’
after ‘midnight’ (l. 204) q; not in f


183 high exalted, lofty                             liquid food. A disturbing echo of the can-
187, 188 gentle Othello probably has both           nibal monsters in Othello’s traveller’s
   Desdemona’s noble birth and her soft dis-        tales (1.3.143–4).
   position in mind (since condition can         198 expostulate complain, remonstrate;
   mean either ‘rank’ or ‘temperament’);            debate
   but Iago characteristically twists the word      unprovide disequip, disarm
   to mean ‘tame, easily managed’ (used of       203 be his undertaker undertake to deal
   animals, esp. horses).                           with him. An undertaker was one who
191 fond foolish, doting                            ‘undertook’ a task on another’s behalf,
   patent licence                                   an entrepreneur or contractor, hence
   touch affect, injure                             ‘funeral undertaker’; but this profession
193–202 I will . . . very good Cf. Giraldi,         did not come into being before the end of
   App. C, p. 443.                                  the 17th century.
193 messes portions of meat; pulpy or semi-      205 Trumpet See App. D (i).

                                             336
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    4.1

                   What trumpet is that same?                                               205
iago I warrant something from Venice.
        Enter Lodovico, jGratiano,k Desdemona, and
        attendants
  ’Tis Lodovico, this, comes from the Duke.
  See, your wife’s with him.
lodovico God save you, worthy general!
othello With all my heart, sir.                                                             210
lodovico (giving Othello a letter)
  The Duke and senators of Venice greet you.
othello (putting the letter to his lips)
  I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
        Othello opens the letter and reads
desdemona
  And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?
iago
  I am very glad to see you, signor—
  Welcome to Cyprus.                                                                        215
lodovico
  I thank you—how does Lieutenant Cassio?
iago Lives, sir.
desdemona
  Cousin, there’s fallen between him and my lord
  An unkind breach; but you shall make all well.
othello
  Are you sure of that?
206–8 I . . . him] f; Something from Venice sure, tis Lodouico, | Come from the Duke, and see
your wife is with him q; I . . . Lodovico—this comes . . . him sisson; I warrant, something
from Venice . . . ’Tis Lodovico! | This comes from the Duke; and see your wife is with him
walker 206.1–2 Enter . . . attendants] hanmer; after ‘A Trumpet’ (l. 205) f, q Gratiano] This
edition (conj. honigmann); not in f, q 209 God save] q1; Saue f, q2 you] f, q2; the q1
211 giving . . . letter] rowe (subs.); not in f, q and] q; and the f 212 putting . . . lips] This
edition; not in f, q 212.1 Othello . . . reads] capell (subs.); not in f, q

206.1 Gratiano Honigmann is almost cer-              Cassio’s absence than in Iago’s welcome;
   tainly right in suggesting that Gratiano,         Iago’s reply is either negligent or sullen,
   as Desdemona’s uncle and an important             and he then remains silent for nearly ﬁfty
   member of the Venetian delegation,                lines.
   should enter here.                             219 unkind (a) unnatural; (b) cruel,
209 God . . . general Metrically amphibi-            hurtful
   ous.                                           220 Are . . . that Othello’s line may be a
214–16 I . . . Lives, sir Honigmann notes            reaction to something in the letter,
   how Iago butts in here; Lodovico’s                as Lodovico imagines (l. 223), or it
   response seems pointedly cool, especially         may be aimed at Desdemona, as she
   in the way he appears more interested in          supposes.

                                             337
4.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

desdemona                My lord?                                                         220
othello (reads)
  ‘This fail you not to do, as you will’—
lodovico
  He did not call; he’s busy in the paper.
  Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?
desdemona
  A most unhappy one: I would do much
  T’atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.                                            225
othello
  Fire and brimstone!
desdemona               My lord?
othello                          Are you wise?
desdemona
  What, is he angry?
lodovico               Maybe the letter moved him;
  For, as I think, they do command him home,
  Deputing Cassio in his government.
desdemona
  By my troth, I am glad on’t.
othello                         Indeed?
desdemona                               My lord?                                          230
othello
  I am glad to see you mad.
221 reads] theobald; not in f, q     223 ’twixt my] f, q2; betweene thy q1   230 By my troth]
q1; Trust me f, q2

224 unhappy unlucky                                   the original sense of the word is simply
225 atone reconcile (literally ‘set at                ‘appointing’; but in Othello’s mind, at
   one’)                                              least, the idea of ‘substitute’, madden-
226 Fire and brimstone The instruments                ingly associated with lieutenancy and
   by which God punished the reputed sex-             place-taking, must also be involved (see
   ual proﬂigacy of Sodom and Gomorrah                Introduction, pp. 155–6; cf. also l. 253,
   (Genesis 19: 24); but also among the tor-          4.2.221).
   ments of hell nominated in Revelation,             government ofﬁce as governor (OED n.
   where a lake of ﬁre and brimstone is               3)
   reserved for (amongst others) ‘whore-           231 I . . . mad Othello’s sarcastic response
   mongers . . . and all liars’ (see Revelation       to Desdemona’s ‘I am glad on’t’ has
   21: 8; and cf. 9: 17, 14: 10, 19: 20), a text      caused editors more trouble than it need:
   that Othello will remember again when              mad = crazy [enough to reveal your love
   he sees Desdemona as ‘like a liar gone to          for Cassio]. However, as Ridley noted,
   burning hell’ (5.2.129).                           Mary Cowden Clarke’s emendation ‘mad
   Fire Probably disyllabic here (as often            to see you glad’ has some plausibility,
   elsewhere).                                        especially in view of the fact that such
   brimstone sulphur                                  transposition errors are not uncommon
229 Deputing As Honigmann points out,                 (see e.g. 2.3.158).

                                               338
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 4.1

desdemona                    Why, sweet Othello!
othello (striking her)                            Devil!
desdemona
  I have not deserved this.
lodovico
  My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
  Though I should swear I saw’t. ’Tis very much—
  Make her amends: she weeps.
othello                           O devil, devil!                                         235
  If that the earth could teem with woman’s tears,
  Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile—
  Out of my sight!
desdemona          I will not stay to offend you.
lodovico
  Truly, an obedient lady.
  I do beseech your lordship call her back.                                               240
othello Mistress!
desdemona          My lord?
othello What would you with her, sir?
lodovico Who I, my lord?
othello
  Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn:
  Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on                                              245
  And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep;
  And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient,
231 Why . . . Othello!] This edition after f (‘Why . . . Othello?’); How . . . Othello? q
231.1 striking her] theobald; not in q, f 236 woman’s] f; womens q 240 an] q; not in f
234 very much an extremely grave matter              word-play is involved: (a) return (OED v.
236 teem with (a) swarm with; (b) be                 21); (b) be converted, change faith (v.
   impregnated by                                    30b); (c) revolt, desert (v. 30c); be in-
237 Each . . . crocodile A complex conceit,          constant (v. 36); (c) have intercourse
   referring simultaneously to the belief that       (Williams, Dictionary, pp. 1440–2, Glos-
   crocodiles were generated spontaneously           sary, p. 316; Partridge, p. 207). The
   from the Nile mud by the action of the sun        archaic sense ‘mislead, beguile, cheat’
   (Antony, 1.3.68–9, 2.7.26–7) and to the           (OED 14b) may also be involved. Since
   proverbial hypocrisy of ‘crocodile tears’         turn is the usual colloquial word for
   (Dent C831).                                      ‘apostasize’ (cf. 2.3.159), the idea of
242 What . . . sir Metrically amphibious,            Othello himself as a Moor ‘turned’ Christ-
   making complete pentameters with both             ian may provide an ironic context for the
   ll. 241 and 243. The bawdy innuendo in            passage.
   this line (‘What do you want her for? |        247–8, 251 obedient . . . obey Othello
   What would you like to do with her?’)             implicitly contrasts his own obedience as
   leads into the open obscenity of the broth-       an ofﬁcer of Venice with Desdemona’s
   el scene (4.2) where Othello treats his wife      betrayal of her domestic ofﬁce. Obedient
   as though she were a prostitute.                  could also mean ‘yielding to desires, com-
244, 245, 246 turn A complex piece of                pliant’ (OED a. 3), while the 17th-century

                                              339
4.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Very obedient.—Proceed you in your tears?—
  Concerning this, sir—O well-painted passion!—
  I am commanded home.—Get you away;                                                         250
  I’ll send for you anon.—Sir, I obey the mandate,
  And will return to Venice.—Hence, avaunt!—
                                                Exit Desdemona
  Cassio shall have my place. And sir, tonight
  I do entreat that we may sup together.
  You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus.—Goats and monkeys!                                        255
                                                           Exit
lodovico
  Is this the noble Moor, whom our full Senate
  Call all in all sufﬁcient? Is this the nature
  Whom passion could not shake? Whose solid virtue
  The shot of accident nor dart of chance
  Could neither graze nor pierce?
iago                                  He is much changed.                                    260
lodovico
  Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
iago
  He’s that he is: I may not breathe my censure

248 tears?] This edition (conj. Warner); teares. f; teares, q 250 home] f, q2; here q1
252.1 Exit Desdemona] rowe; not in f, q 255.1 Exit] f, q (corr.); not in q (uncorr.) 256–
7 Is . . . nature] f; This the noble nature q 262 censure | What] jennens; censure. | What
f; censure, | What q


   pronunciation of obedient would allow an          entendre—hasn’t Cassio already usurped
   actor to disclose the word bed mockingly          his place in bed?’ (p. 10).
   concealed in its second syllable.              255 Goats and monkeys Echoing Iago at
                                                     3.3.405.
249 this i.e. the letter from Venice              256 full complete, whole
   painted depicted, represented; acted,          257 sufﬁcient competent
   feigned. The metaphor is taken from the        258 virtue manly courage
   language of criticism, but in this context     260 graze Earliest use cited in OED.
   is inevitably tainted by association with      262 He’s . . . is Cf. ‘I am not what I am’
   the painting of cosmetics (a stock object of      (1.1.64).
   contemporary misogynistic satire).             262–4 I . . . were Iago at his most teasingly
   passion (a) emotion; (b) the sufferings of        opaque. The reference of might appears to
   a martyr. Passion also seems to have been         shift in a confusing way: ‘it’s not for me to
   used as a technical term in the theatre to        conjecture about his sanity; if indeed he is
   describe a passionate speech or mimed             not everything that he might be, then I
   display of emotion (cf. Hamlet, 3.2.10).          only wish he were’. But it is possible (as
252 avaunt be gone                                   Sanders suggests) that he means: ‘if he is
253 place The bawdy sense of the word                not out of his mind, I wish to God he were
   is now irresistible (cf. 2.3.306–7,               (for only that could serve to excuse his
   3.3.250–1). According to Tynan, ‘Olivier          actions)’.
   turned this line into an ironic double         262 censure opinion

                                              340
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 4.2

  What he might be; if what he might, he is not,
  I would to heaven he were.
lodovico                       What? Strike his wife?
iago
  Faith that was not so well; yet would I knew                                            265
  That stroke would prove the worst!
lodovico                               Is it his use?
  Or did the letters work upon his blood
  And new-create his fault?
iago                          Alas, alas!
  It is not honesty in me to speak
  What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,                                      270
  And his own courses will denote him so
  That I may save my speech: do but go after
  And mark how he continues.
lodovico
  I am sorry that I am deceived in him.               Exeunt

4.2    Enter Othello and Emilia
othello
  You have seen nothing then?
emilia
  Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
othello
  Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
emilia
  But then I saw no harm; and then I heard
  Each syllable that breath made up between them.                                            5
othello What? Did they never whisper?
emilia Never, my lord.
263 if what] f, q2; if as q1 264 his] f; this q 271 denote] q; deuote f (uncorr.; ‘u’ is
turned ‘n’); deonte f (corr.)
  4.2] f (Scena Secunda.); not in q 3 you] f; and you q

266 use normal way of behaving                        ally on Othello’s folly in the eavesdrop-
267 blood passion                                     ping episode at the beginning of 4.1,
268 new-create Earliest citation in OED.              where his reliance upon ‘ocular proof’
271 courses conduct, esp. of a reprehen-              entirely deceived him.
   sible kind (OED n. 23b)                          2 nor . . . suspect As Honigmann sug-
   denote reveal the truth about                      gests, ‘suspect’ may be transitive; in
4.2.1–4 seen . . . heard Where Othello                which case Emilia’s speech remains
   emphasizes seeing, Emilia assumes that             incomplete, Othello interrupting her
   hearing supplies the most persuasive form          before she can complete the sentence.
   of evidence, a contrast that reﬂects ironic-     7 Never . . . lord Metrically amphibious.

                                              341
4.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello Nor send you out o’ the way?
emilia Never.
othello
  To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?                                       10
emilia
  Never, my lord.
othello            That’s strange.
emilia
  I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
  Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
  Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom.
  If any wretch have put this in your head,                                                  15
  Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse;
  For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
  There’s no man happy: the purest of their wives
  Is foul as slander.
othello              Bid her come hither—go.
                                                  Exit Emilia
  She says enough; yet she’s a simple bawd                                                  20
  That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,

10 her gloves, her mask] f; her mask, her gloues q 16 heaven] f, q2; heauens q1        18 their
wives] f, q2; her Sex q1 19.1 Exit Emilia] f; after ‘slander’ (l. 20) q


10 mask Worn as a disguise during the                 ed as making death the punishment for
   Venetian carnival, but also used to protect        sexual knowledge) is appropriate in a
   ladies’ complexions from the sun.                  number of ways: not only has Iago
13 Lay . . . stake stake my soul as a wager;          (whom the language of the play repeated-
   but lay down suggests ‘lay down my life’           ly identiﬁes as a kind of ‘demi-devil’
   and hence a martyr’s burning at the                (5.2.299) tempted Emilia to steal the
   stake.                                             handkerchief as the satanic serpent
15 If any wretch Of course she already has            tempts Eve to pluck the forbidden fruit,
   Iago in mind: this is as close as Emilia dare      but the curse of murderous enmity
   come to acknowledging her own part in              between them will be acted out in the ﬁnal
   what has happened.                                 scene. Cf. also 3.3.449, 5.2.363.
16 serpent’s curse ‘Then the Lord God              20 bawd procuress.
   said to the serpent, Because thou hast          21–3 This . . . do’t Many editors take the
   done this, thou art cursed above all               ‘whore’ to be Desdemona, but it is Emilia
   cattle, and above every beast of the               who is cast in Othello’s imagination as
   ﬁeld: upon thy belly shalt thou go, and            the guardian of ‘villainous secrets’ (ll.
   dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy            27–30). Acknowledging this, Honig-
   life. I will also put enmity between               mann sentimentally suggests that kneel
   thee and the woman, and between thy                and pray must refer to Desdemona, but
   seed and her seed. He shall break thine            there is no reason why such routine piety
   head, and thou shalt bruise his heel’              should be attributed to her alone; Othello
   (Genesis 3: 14–15). The recollection of the        is emphasizing the hypocrisy of Emilia’s
   Genesis story (which was often interpret-          discretion.

                                               342
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.2

  A closet, lock, and key of villainous secrets;
  And yet she’ll kneel and pray—I have seen her do’t.
       Enter Desdemona and Emilia
desdemona
  My lord, what is your will?
othello                       Pray you, chuck, come hither.
desdemona
  What is your pleasure?
othello                   Let me see your eyes—                                                25
  Look in my face.
desdemona          What horrible fancy’s this?
othello (to Emilia)
  Some of your function, mistress:
  Leave procreants alone and shut the door,
  Cough or cry ‘Hem!’ if anybody come.
  Your mystery, your mystery—nay, dispatch!                                                   30
                                                 Exit Emilia
desdemona (kneeling)
  Upon my knee, what doth your speech import?
22 closet, lock, and key] This edition; A Closset Lockeand Key f; closet, locke and key, q;
closset-locke and key rowe 24 Pray you] f; Pray q 27 mistress:] f (Mistris); mistrisse, q
30 nay] q; May f 31 kneeling] This edition; not in f, q knee] f; knees q doth] f; does q

22 closet, lock, and key The closet (nor-             amplifying an initial insistence that
   mally a small inner chamber) was a place           Emilia should perform the proper role of
   of enhanced importance in early modern             a bawd (Some of your function = ‘show us
   households, a site of exceptional privacy,         some of the behaviour proper to your
   and one of the few spaces in the house             trade’; OED, function, n. 3), or whether (as
   that were likely to be locked: cf. Angel           the Q punctuation might suggest) Othello
   Day, The English Secretary (1586), ii. 103         begins with a description of what others
   (cited in OED): ‘We do call the most secret        in the trade do (Some of your function =
   place in the house appropriate unto our            ‘some people in your profession’), and
   own private studies . . . a Closet.’ In alle-      then orders Emilia to play the part.
   gorized descriptions of the human body,         28 procreants procreators (ﬁrst recorded
   the heart (or bosom) is often imaged as a          use of procreant as a noun in OED). Here
   closet of emotional secrets.                       an ironic euphemism for ‘fornicators’.
24–5 will . . . pleasure For Othello, the          31–40 kneeling . . . rising       Desdemona’s
   sexual doubles entendres in these inno-            words indicate that she should kneel at
   cently meant words can easily be inter-            l. 31, but it is not entirely clear where
   preted as proof of Desdemona’s vicious             she ought to rise; however, the talk of
   secrets.                                           swearing, damnation, and heaven in ll.
25–6 Let . . . face Cf. Dent E231, ‘The eye is        35–9 seems appropriate to the kneeling
   the window of the heart’. This will be             gesture, while Desdemona’s indignant
   ‘ocular proof’ in a double sense.                  questions at l. 40 provide a natural cue for
26 fancy fantasy                                      her to rise. The repeated kneelings of this
27–9 Some . . . come It is unclear whether            scene, with their echo of the Iago–Othello
   (as is usually assumed, and as the F punc-         oath-taking in 3.3, produce a powerful
   tuation suggests) the ﬁrst part of the             visual leitmotif (cf. l. 151).
   speech consists of a series of commands,        31 import mean

                                               343
4.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  I understand a fury in your words,
  But not the words.
othello               Why, what art thou?
desdemona
  Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.
othello
  Come swear it: damn thyself,                                                                35
  Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
  Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double-damned:
  Swear thou art honest.
desdemona                  Heaven doth truly know it.
othello
  Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
desdemona jrisingk
  To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?                                               40
othello
  Ah, Desdemon, away, away, away!
desdemona
  Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
  Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
  If haply you my father do suspect
  An instrument of this your calling back,                                                    45
  Lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him,
  I have lost him too.
othello                Had it pleased heavens

33 But . . . words] q; not in f 37 seize] f (ceaze); cease q 40 rising] This edition; not in f, q
41 Ah, Desdemon] f; O Desdemona q 43 motive] f; occasion q these] f; those q 44
haply] q; happely f 46–7 lost . . . lost] f, q2; left . . . left q1 47 I] f; Why I q heavens]
johnson; Heauen f; heauen q; God oxford


33 But . . . words Q’s line completes the            should perhaps be conscious of all three
   sense; perhaps omitted from F through a           meanings.
   confusion resulting from the repetition of     42 why . . . weep Cf. 5.2.38 n.
   words.                                         44–5 If . . . back The suddenness of
38 truly know it Both ‘really know it’ and           Othello’s recall is sometimes cited as evi-
   ‘know it to be true’.                             dence of the play’s ‘double time scheme’,
39 false as hell Proverbial: Dent H398.              since it is impossible for the Venetian
41 Desdemon            Patrick      Stewart          Senate to have heard of the dispersal
   (Washington, 1997) used the abbrevia-             of the Turkish ﬂeet; but Desdemona’s
   tion to bring out the latent pun in the           response suggests that Othello may sim-
   name: ‘Des-demon’.                                ply be the victim of her father’s political
   away ‘Either she clings to him and he             lobbying.
   pushes her away, or he wants to get away,      47–53 Had . . . patience Othello imagines
   or he means “let’s get away from all this         himself as Job, the type of suffering
   pointless talk” ’ (Honigmann); an actor           patience (see Job 2: 3–7).

                                             344
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.2

   To try me with afﬂiction, had they rained
   All kind of sores and shames on my bare head,
   Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,                                                    50
   Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
   I should have found in some place of my soul
   A drop of patience; but, alas, to make me
   The ﬁxèd ﬁgure for the scorn of time,
   To point his slow and moving ﬁnger at!                                                     55
        jHe groansk
   Yet could I bear that too, well, very well:
   But there, where I have garnered up my heart,
   Where either I must live or bear no life,
   The fountain from the which my current runs
   Or else dries up—to be discarded thence,                                                  60
   Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads

48 they rained] f, q2; he ram’d q1; he rained oxford 49 kind] f; kindes q 51 utmost] f;
not in q 52 place] f; part q 54 The] f; A q scorn of time] This edition (conj. malone);
time of Scorne f, q (scorne) 55 and moving ﬁnger] f; vnmouing ﬁngers q1; vnmouing ﬁnger
q2 55.1 He groans] after q (– oh, oh); not in f


47–8 heavens . . . they It is conceivable             tradictory and could easily have resulted
   that F’s heaven is a collective noun (= the        from aural confusion.
   heavenly powers), but it seems more likely      57–62 But . . . there Sanders and Honig-
   that a ﬁnal s was dropped at some point in         mann note the echo of Proverbs 5: 15–18
   the transmission. Some editors conjec-             (whose chapter title, in the Geneva ver-
   ture, on the basis of Q’s heaven . . . he,         sion, is ‘Whoredom forbidden’): ‘Drink
   that the original read God; but such sub-          the water of thy cistern, and of the rivers
   stitutions are not characteristic of Q, and        out of the mids[t] of thine own well. Let
   he is more probably a mistaken attempt to          thy fountains ﬂow forth . . . let thy foun-
   resolve the confusion of number.                   tain be blessed, and rejoice with the wife
51 utmost (a) greatest; (b) last                      of thy youth.’ Honigmann further cites
54–5 The ﬁxèd . . . ﬁnger The metaphor is             Homilies, 114, where whoredom is
   that of a clock, whose slow-moving hand            described as ‘that most ﬁlthy lake, foul
   points, as if in contempt, at the ﬁxèd ﬁgure       puddle, and stinking sink, whereunto all
   of Othello.                                        kinds of sins and evils ﬂow’. The sexual
54 scorn of time F’s and Q’s ‘time of scorn’          suggestiveness of the lines was brought
   could = ‘this scornful time’, or it may be         out by Bruce Purchase (Mermaid, 1971)
   (as Honigmann suggests) that the line              who delivered them staring hard at
   should be repunctuated to read ‘The ﬁxèd           Desdemona’s crotch.
   ﬁgure, for the time, of scorn’ (i.e. the ﬁxed   59 fountain spring. For early modern con-
   target of scorn for this whole age); but, in       ceptions of the heart as both ‘receptacle
   the light of Hamlet’s ‘scorns of time’             [and] fountain’ of emotion see Paster,
   (3.1.72) the phrase seems more likely              pp. 69–70.
   to represent a not uncommon kind                61 cistern water-tank, reservoir. The mean-
   of accidental transposition, presumably            ing ‘cesspool’, favoured by Sanders and
   occurring in a manuscript which lies               Mowat–Werstine, is not warranted by
   somewhere behind both printed texts. Cf.           OED; but cf. Antony, 2.5.96, ‘A cistern for
   2.3.158, sense of place.                           scaled snakes’.
55 slow and moving Though both readings               toads Paster cites Nashe, Terrors of the
   have their defenders, Q’s unmoving is con-         Night: ‘And even as slime and dirt in a

                                               345
4.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
  Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,
  Ay there, look grim as hell.
desdemona
  I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.                                                    65
othello
  O ay, as summer ﬂies are in the shambles,
  That quicken even with blowing. O thou black weed,
  Who art so lovely fair, and smell’st so sweet
  That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne’er
     been born!
desdemona
  Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?                                                 70
othello
  Was this fair paper, this most goodly book
  Made to write ‘whore’ upon?—What committed?
63 thou] f;    thy q 64 Ay] theobald; I f, q there, look] capell, after theobald (there
look); heere    looke f, q 66 as] f (corr.), q; as a f (uncorr.)   summer] f; summers q
67 black] q;   not in f 68 Who] f; why q fair, and] f; faire? | Thou q 69 ne’er] q (ne’re);
neuer f 72     upon] f, q2; on q1

   standing puddle, engender toads and            66 shambles slaughterhouse
   frogs . . . so this slimy melancholy           67 quicken (a) come alive; (b) become
   humour still thickening as it stands still,       pregnant
   engendreth many misshapen objects in              even with blowing (a) as soon as
   our imaginations’ (The Unfortunate Trav-          they are laid; (b) as soon as they deposit
   eller and Other Works, ed. J. B. Steane           their eggs. In this highly condensed image
   (Harmondsworth, 1972) ). Cf. also                 it is as though the very maggots are
   3.3.273–6.                                        impregnated at the moment of their
                                                     birth.
62 knot couple                                       black McMillin (Q, p. 41) suggests that
   gender procreate                                  this is an actor’s (or possibly a scribe’s)
   Turn thy complexion Either ‘turn and              interpolation to ﬁll out the metrical deﬁ-
   look’ (complexion = face; OED n. 4b, citing       ciency created by Q’s confused lineation.
   only this example); or ‘change your tem-          On the other hand, the antithesis with
   perament’ (as revealed in the appearance          lovely fair is characteristic of the play’s
   of your face, i.e. from ‘rose-lipped’ to          imagery, and Shakespeare may have writ-
   ‘grim as hell’, i.e. black).                      ten a hexameter line.
63 rose-lipped Earliest citation in OED.          70, 72, 73, 76, 80 committed Othello
64 Ay, there . . . hell For a subtle analysis        sniffs out another unwitting double
   of this line in the context of the syntacti-      entendre: commit = commit adultery (OED
   cal and semantic complexities of the              v. 6c).
   speech, including the possible word-play       71–2 Was . . . upon A very early instance of
   on ‘Ay/I’ suggested by the F and Q                the (now commonplace) image of woman
   spelling, see Pechter, pp. 89–90. Like            as a tabula rasa awaiting male inscription.
   Honigmann (Commentary and Texts, p.               The ﬁgure of a lover as a book occurs else-
   90), Pechter defends F and Q ‘here look’;         where, however: e.g. Romeo, 1.3.83–94,
   but the gestural emphasis of the speech           3.2.83–4, King John, 2.1.486, Dream,
   from l. 57 makes ‘there’ more rhetorically        2.2.127–8.
   effective.

                                              346
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.2

  ‘Committed’! O thou public commoner,
  I should make very forges of my cheeks
  That would to cinders burn up modesty                                                        75
  Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
  Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
  The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets
  Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth
  And will not hear’t.—What committed?                                                        80
  Impudent strumpet!
desdemona               By heaven you do me wrong.
othello
  Are not you a strumpet?
desdemona                    No, as I am a Christian.
  If to preserve this vessel for my lord
  From any other foul unlawful touch
  Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.                                                          85
othello
  What, not a whore?
desdemona               No, as I shall be saved.
othello Is’t possible?
73–6 Committed . . . committed] f, q2; not in q1 79 hollow] f, q2; hallow q1 80 hear’t] f,
q; hear it steevens 81 Impudent strumpet] q; not in f 84 other] f, q2; hated q1

73–6 Committed . . . committed Probably            80 hear’t Steevens’s emendation to ‘hear
   omitted from Q as a result of eye-skip             it’ regularizes the metre but still leaves
   to the second What committed?, but a               the line a syllable short. However, a
   possible cut; less likely to be an addition        brief silence after not hear’t before the
   to F.                                              ﬁnal explosive What committed! seems
73 public commoner common prostitute                  appropriate.
74–5 I . . . modesty Othello imagines his          81 Impudent Both ‘insolent’ and ‘shame-
   inﬂamed cheeks as a blacksmith’s forge             less’ (from Latin pudere = feel shame).
   heated by the ﬁres of shame. While per-         83 vessel Used in scripture as a metaphor for
   haps strengthened (as Honigmann sug-               the body: ‘every one of you should know
   gests) by an implicit comparison between           how to possess his vessel in holiness and
   cheeks and the bellows that heat the               honour, and not in the lust of concupis-
   forge, the blushing image is inconsistent          cences’ (Thessalonians 4: 4–5); but often
   with Othello’s supposed blackness;                 given a bawdy sense, because of the refer-
   though it might be argued that this                ence in 1 Peter 3: 47 to ‘woman as . . . the
   reﬂects his unconscious internalization of         weaker vessel’ (see Williams, Glossary,
   the white Venetian norm.                           pp. 324–5, Dictionary, pp. 1479–80).
77 stops blocks                                    87 Is’t possible? The last repetition of this
   moon symbol of chastity                            question can be used to taunt the audi-
   winks shuts her eye                                ence with the suggestion that even now,
78 The . . . meets Playing on the proverbial          just before he instructs Emilia (in a
   ‘As free as the wind’ (Dent A88) by inter-         symbolically loaded phrase) to ‘turn the
   preting ‘free’ as ‘licentious’. Cf. Merchant,      key’, Othello glimpses the truth of his
   2.6.19: ‘the strumpet wind’.                       terrible mistake. In Sam Mendes’s 1997
79 hollow mine i.e. the Cave of the Winds             production the line provided the cue for
   (see Virgil, Aeneid, 1.52)                         a despairingly tender and lingering

                                               347
4.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

desdemona O heaven forgive us!
othello I cry you mercy then.
       Enter Emilia
  I took you for that cunning whore of Venice                                                  90
  That married with Othello. (To Emilia) You, mistress,
  That have the ofﬁce opposite to Saint Peter
  And keeps the gate of hell, you, you!—Ay, you:
  We’ve done our course; there’s money for your pains;
  I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel.        Exit                                    95
emilia
  Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
  How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
desdemona Faith, half asleep.
emilia
  Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?
desdemona
  With who?
emilia        Why, with my lord, madam.                                                       100
desdemona
  Who is thy lord?
88 forgive us] f, q2; forgiuenesse q1 89 then] f, q2; not in q1 89.1 Enter Emilia] This edi-
tion; after ‘Mistris’ (l. 91) f; after ‘saued’ (l. 86) q1; after ‘Venice’ (l. 90) q2 93 gate of] f;
gates in q you, you!—ay, you] f (You, you: I you), q2 (you, you, I, You); I, you, you, you q1
94 We’ve] after q (We ha); We haue f 101 Who . . . lady] f, q2; not in q1

   embrace, broken violently on ‘I cry you            p. 660; and cf. Trag. Lear, 4.5.124–6;
   mercy then’. Cf. 2.3.276.                          ofﬁce picks up Iago’s bawdy innuendo at
                                                      1.3.377. For the use of singular verbs
88 O . . . us Metrically amphibious.                  with plural subjects, see 1.1.150.
89 I . . . mercy I beg your pardon                 94 done our course ﬁnished our sexual
89.1 Enter Emilia It is clear from Emilia’s           bout; course is a common sexual pun,
   words at ll. 115 and 120 that Emilia is            combining metaphors of food, the chase,
   meant to overhear Othello calling his wife         riding, racing, and jousting (OED n. 26, 7,
   ‘whore’, so F’s placing of the direction           1, 3, 5).
   must be wrong. However, it is not uncom-        95 counsel secret
   mon for playhouse scripts (such as Q            96 conceive imagine; but also echoing the
   appears to be) to anticipate entries, so           imagery of unnatural conception from
   that actors could be alerted by the book-          1.3.392–3, 3.4.151–2.
   holder. Moreover, the dialogue provides         98 half asleep half-dead, stunned (OED n. 3,
   no very plausible cue for Emilia’s re-entry        4). Emilia’s anxiously repeated ‘How do
   at l. 86, as the Q2 editor seems to have           you?’ suggests that Desdemona may have
   noticed when he made the unusual deci-             collapsed.
   sion to reject both F and Q, and have           101 thy lord . . . yours The play on two
   Emilia re-enter on ‘I took you for that cun-       slightly different senses of lord (‘master’
   ning whore of Venice’, an entry perfectly          and ‘husband’) is a reminder of the simi-
   cued by Desdemona’s terriﬁed cry ‘O                lar way in which patriarchal ideas of
   heaven forgive us!’ (l. 88).                       household government constructed the
92–3 That . . . hell For hell as the vagina see       roles of wife and servant. See Introduc-
   Williams, Glossary, p. 156, Dictionary,            tion, p. 110.

                                              348
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 4.2

emilia             He that is yours, sweet lady.
desdemona
  I have none: do not talk to me, Emilia—
  I cannot weep, nor answers have I none
  But what should go by water. Prithee tonight
  Lay on my bed my wedding sheets, remember,                                             105
  And call thy husband hither.
emilia                          Here’s a change indeed.
                                                       Exit
desdemona
  ’Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
  How have I been behaved that he might stick
  The small’st opinion on my least misuse?
       Enter Iago and Emilia
iago
  What is your pleasure, madam? How is’t with you?                                       110
desdemona
  I cannot tell—those that do teach young babes
  Do it with gentle means and easy tasks:
  He might have chid me so, for in good faith
  I am a child to chiding.
iago                      What is the matter, lady?
emilia
  Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,                                               115
  Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her
  That true hearts cannot bear it.

103 answers] f; answer q 105 my wedding] f, q2; our wedding q1 107 very meet] f, q2;
very well q1 109 least misuse] f, q2; greatest abuse q1 109.1 Enter . . . Emilia] f, q2; after
‘Madam’ (l. 110) q1 114 to] f, q2; at q1 117 That] f; As q hearts] f (corr.), q; heart f
(uncorr.) it] f; not in q


102 I have none Cf. Othello at 5.2.99: ‘I           temporary moral discourse opinion was
   have no wife.’                                   typically opposed to rational judgement.
104 go by water travel by water (i.e. be con-    109 misuse ill conduct
   veyed by tears); perhaps, in the context of   112 tasks Honigmann suggests that this
   the wedding sheets, tinged with nostalgic        may = reproofs (from task, v. 5 = take to
   recollection of Desdemona’s elopement            task, reprove).
   by gondola (1.1.124).                         114 I . . . chiding I am as unaccustomed as
105 wedding sheets For the considerable             any child to reproof
   signiﬁcance with which wedding sheets         115 bewhored called her a whore (ﬁrst
   were invested in early modern culture, see       example in OED)
   Introduction, pp. 173–4.                      116 despite scorn, abuse
108–9 stick . . . opinion fasten the least          heavy angry, violent; hard to bear,
   hint of (unfavourable) conjecture. In con-       grievous (OED a. 22, 23)

                                             349
4.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

desdemona
  Am I that name, Iago?
iago                     What name, fair lady?
desdemona
  Such as she said my lord did say I was.
emilia
  He called her ‘whore’: a beggar in his drink                                                120
  Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
iago Why did he so?
desdemona
  I do not know: I am sure I am none such.
iago
  Do not weep, do not weep—alas the day!
emilia
  Hath she forsook so many noble matches,                                                     125
  Her father, and her country, and her friends,
  To be called whore? Would it not make one weep?
desdemona
  It is my wretched fortune.
iago                         Beshrew him for’t!
  How comes this trick upon him?
desdemona                           Nay, heaven doth know.
emilia
  I will be hanged if some eternal villain,                                                   130
  Some busy and insinuating rogue,
  Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some ofﬁce,
  Have not devised this slander; I’ll be hanged else.

119 said] f; sayes q   125 Hath] f; Has q    126 and her friends] f, q2; all her friends q1


121 callet slut, whore                              that Emilia ‘suspiciously eye[s] Iago’; how-
128 Beshrew him Cf. 3.4.146.                        ever, Edwin Booth’s acting edition (1875)
129 How . . . him how has this delusion             vigorously challenged this suggestion in
   overcome him? (But ‘trick’ can also sug-         favour of a more subtle dramatic irony
   gest ‘hoax’.)                                    (see Potter, p. 51). For the metatheatrical
130–44 I . . . west Some actors have                basis of Emilia’s conjecture, see Introduc-
   assumed that Emilia’s tirade is directed at      tion, p. 160, n. 1.
   Iago (as his angry replies might be taken     130 eternal inveterate (and, by implication,
   to recognize); and she could not, of             damned)
   course, accuse him directly without dis-      131 busy prying, meddlesome
   closing her own betrayal of Desdemona.           insinuating artfully ingratiating
   But there is no other evidence for such       132 cogging fraudulent
   distrust. Charles Fechter’s acting edition       cozening cheating
   (1861) included a direction indicating

                                             350
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                              4.2

iago
  Fie, there is no such man! It is impossible.
desdemona
  If any such there be, heaven pardon him.                                            135
emilia
  A halter pardon him, and hell gnaw his bones!
  Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her
        company?
  What place? What time? What form? What likelihood?
  The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave,
  Some base, notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.                                    140
  O heaven, that such companions thou’dst unfold,
  And put in every honest hand a whip
  To lash the rascals naked through the world,
  Even from the east to th’ west!
iago                              Speak within door.
emilia
  O, ﬁe upon them! Some such squire he was                                            145
  That turned your wit the seamy side without
  And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
iago
  You are a fool—go to!
desdemona                O God, Iago,
  What shall I do to win my lord again?
  Good friend, go to him; for, by this light of heaven,                               150
  I know not how I lost him.
139 most villainous] f, q2; outragious q1 141 heaven] q; Heauens f 143 rascals] f; ras-
call q 144 door] f (doore); dores q 145 them] f; him q 148 O God] alexander (after q,
‘O good’); Alas f 151–64 Here . . . me] f, q2; not in q1 151 She kneels] rowe (subs.); not
in f

136 halter hangman’s noose                     143 To . . . world Lashing through the
137 keeps her company Perhaps playing             streets was a standard punishment.
   on the colloquial sense, ‘courts her’.      144 Even . . . west Cf. Dent E43.1.
138 form manner                                   within door more quietly, more
139 abused Cf. 2.1.226.                           discreetly
140 knave (a) villain; (b) man of low rank     145 squire Contemptuous; equivalent to
   fellow Like knave (b), a term of social        fellow (OED n. 1d).
   disdain.                                    146 turned your wit turned your wits
141 companions low fellows (OED n.1 4)            inside out
   unfold expose                                  seamy worst or roughest (side of a gar-
142 honest The pointedness of Emilia’s            ment). Earliest citation in OED.
   attack is emphasized by the way she turns   147 suspect me Cf. 1.3.375–7, 2.1.286–90.
   Iago’s own sobriquet against him.           148 go to Exclamation of impatience, here
                                                  equivalent to ‘shut up!’

                                           351
4.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

          She kneels
                               Here I kneel:
  If e’er my will did trespass ’gainst his love,
  Either in discourse, or thought, or actual deed,
  Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense
  Delighted them in any other form,                                                         155
  Or that I do not yet—and ever did,
  And ever will, though he do shake me off
  To beggarly divorcement—love him dearly,
  Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much,
  And his unkindness may defeat my life,                                                    160
  But never taint my love. I cannot say ‘whore’:
  It does abhor me now I speak the word,
  To do the act that might th’addition earn
  Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.
iago jhelping her to risek
  I pray you be content: ’tis but his humour;                                               165
  The business of the state does him offence,
  And he does chide with you.
desdemona If ’twere no other—
153 discourse, or] q2; discourse of f 155 them in] q2; them: or f 165 helping her to rise]
booth in Furness; ‘She rises’ after ‘love’ (l. 161) oxford; not in f, q 167 And . . . you] q; not
in f

151–64 Here . . . make me Almost cer-                ural behaviour. A play on the racial sense
   tainly a cut in Q, as the metrical incom-         of ‘kind’ may also be involved.
   pleteness of l. 151 in that text suggests.     161 I . . . ‘whore’ Cf. ll. 120–7.
151 She kneels The visual echo of Iago’s and      162 abhor me (a) cause me abhorrence; (b)
   Othello’s sinister troth-plighting at the         render me abhorrent; with a familiar
   end of 3.3 is especially signiﬁcant here,         pun on whore. Honigmann cites Homilies,
   since Desdemona is not only reasserting           109: ‘whoredom . . . ought to be ab-
   her marital vows of love and obedience,           horred’.
   but kneeling before her persecutor just as     163 addition title, badge of honour (OED n.
   Othello has done.                                 4, 5)
152 trespass sin (as in e.g. the Lord’s Prayer)   164 world’s . . . vanity all the empty pride
153 discourse . . . deed Cf. the liturgical          and worthless treasures of the world
   formula from the general confession            165 humour mood, whim
   ‘thought, word, and deed’ (1559 Book           166 does causes
   of Common Prayer, service of Holy              167 And . . . you An inessential ampliﬁca-
   Communion).                                       tion, whose disappearance from F is con-
154, 156 that if                                     sistent with revision, since Desdemona’s
155 Delighted them took pleasure (ethic              reply follows a little more naturally from
   dative)                                           the previous line.
   form body, outward appearance; beauty          168 If . . . other—Metrically amphibious.
   (OED n. 3, 1e)                                    Oxford may be right in treating this as an
156 yet still                                        exclamation (= ‘If only that were all!’),
159 Comfort forswear me may I lose all               rather than (as most editors assume) an
   hope of comfort                                   incomplete or interrupted speech.
159, 160 Unkindness (a) cruelty; (b) unnat-

                                              352
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.2

iago It is but so, I warrant.
       jTrumpets sound withink
  Hark how these instruments summon to supper:                                             170
  The messengers of Venice stays the meat.
  Go in, and weep not: all things shall be well.
                               Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia
       Enter Roderigo
  How now, Roderigo?
roderigo I do not ﬁnd that thou deal’st justly with me.
iago What in the contrary?                                                                 175
roderigo Every day thou doffest me with some device,
  Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from
  me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least
  advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it,
  nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace what already I                                 180
  have foolishly suffered.
iago Will you hear me, Roderigo?
roderigo Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and
  performances are no kin together.
iago You charge me most unjustly.                                                          185
roderigo With naught but truth: I have wasted myself out
  of my means; the jewels you have had from me to deliver
  Desdemona would half have corrupted a votarist; you
  have told me she hath received them, and returned me
  expectations and comforts of sudden respect and                                          190
  acquaintance, but I ﬁnd none.
169 It is . . . warrant] f; Tis . . . warrant you q Trumpets . . . within] rowe (subs., after l.
170); not in f, q 170 summon] f; summon you q 171 The messengers] f; And the
great Messengers q1; The meate, great Messengers q2 stays the meat] f; stay q 172.1
Exeunt . . . Emilia] f; Exit women. q 172.2 Enter Roderigo] f; after ‘Roderigo’ (l. 173) q
176 doffest] q; dafts f 177 now, keepest] f, q2; thou keepest q1 183 Faith] q1; not in f,
q2 I . . . and] q; I haue heard too much: and your words and f (corr.); And hell gnaw his
bones f (uncorr.) 184 performances] f; performance q 186 With . . . truth] f, q2; not in
q1 187 my] f; not in q deliver] f; deliuer to q 189 hath] f; has q 190 expectations] f;
expectation q 191 acquaintance] f, q2; acquittance q1

169.1 Trumpets See App. D (i).                    190 comforts encouragement (OED n. 1a)
171 stays the meat await their meal                  sudden immediate
172 all . . . well Proverbial: Dent A164             respect esteem; favour, partiality (OED n.
176 doffest me put me off                            16, 13b). Stronger than it sounds to us: in
   device contrivance, trick                         Trag. Lear the King of France’s ‘love . . .
178 conveniency convenient opportunity               kindle[s] to inﬂamed respect’ (1.1.255).
   (OED n. 4c; earliest example c.1645)           191 acquaintance familiarity; perhaps with
179 advantage of occasion for                        a bawdy quibble on ‘quaint’ (= vagina; see
180 put up put up with                               Williams, Glossary, p. 252). Q’s ‘acquit-
188 votarist nun                                     tance’ (= recompense) is also possible.

                                             353
4.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago Well, go to, very well!
roderigo ‘Very well’, ‘go to’? I cannot ‘go to’, man, nor ’tis
  not ‘very well’; by this hand, I say ’tis very scurvy, and
  begin to ﬁnd myself fopped in it.                                                          195
iago Very well.
roderigo I tell you, ’tis not very well! I will make myself
  known to Desdemona: if she will return me my jewels,
  I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicita-
  tion; if not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.                             200
iago You have said now.
roderigo Ay, and said nothing but what I protest
  intendment of doing.
iago Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee, and even from
  this instant do build on thee a better opinion than ever                                   205
  before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo: thou hast taken
  against me a most just exception; but yet I protest I have
  dealt most directly in thy affair.
roderigo It hath not appeared.
iago I grant indeed it hath not appeared; and your                                           210
  suspicion is not without wit and judgement. But,
  Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed which I have
  greater reason to believe now than ever—I mean
  purpose, courage, and valour—this night show it. If
  thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take                                    215


192 well] f, q2; good q1 193 nor ’tis] f, q2; it is q1 194 by . . . very] q1; Nay I think
it is f; I say t’is very q2 197 I tell you, ’tis] f; I say it is q 202 said] f, q2; I haue said q1
205 instant] f, q2; time q1 207 exception] f; conception q 208 affair] f (Affaire), q2;
affaires q1 212 in] f; within q 215 enjoy] f; enioyest q



193 go to Roderigo quibbles on the bawdy              response to Roderigo’s ambiguous hint of
   sense of the phrase: cf. Trag. Lear,               a challenge, meaning ‘I heard that (and
   4.5.111–12: ‘the wren goes to’t. . . . let         don’t expect to back out of it)’.
   copulation thrive’ (and see Williams,           202–3 protest intendment of insist that I
   Glossary, p. 144, Dictionary, pp. 605–6;           have every intention of
   Partridge, pp. 121–2).                          204 mettle courage, spirit
195 fopped made a fool of, duped                   206–7 taken . . . exception taken under-
200 seek satisfaction seek repayment;                 standable offence, justiﬁably found fault
   demand atonement (perhaps with the                 with me
   implication ‘challenge to a duel’)              208 directly straightforwardly
201 You have said ‘You have had your say’          209–10 It . . . appeared Iago slightly turns
   (Honigmann); ‘What you now say is true’            the meaning of Roderigo’s phrase from
   (Onions). But perhaps in the light of the          ‘there’s been no evidence of it’ to ‘that is
   next two speeches it should be taken as a          how it may have seemed’.

                                              354
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  4.2

  me from this world with treachery, and devise engines for
  my life.
roderigo Well, what is it? Is it within reason and
  compass?
iago Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to                                220
  depute Cassio in Othello’s place.
roderigo Is that true? Why, then Othello and Desdemona
  return again to Venice.
iago O no, he goes into Mauretania and taketh away with
  him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered                                    225
  here by some accident—wherein none can be so
  determinate as the removing of Cassio.
roderigo How do you mean ‘removing’ him?
iago Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s place—
  knocking out his brains.                                                                230
roderigo And that you would have me to do?
iago Ay, if you dare do yourself a proﬁt and a right. He
  sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him.
  He knows not yet of his honourable fortune: if you will
  watch his going thence—which I will fashion to fall out                                 235
  between twelve and one—you may take him at your
  pleasure; I will be near to second your attempt, and he
  shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but
  go along with me: I will show you such a necessity in his
  death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on                                  240
  him. It is now high supper time, and the night grows to
  waste: about it!
218 what is it] f; not in q 220 commission] f, q2; command q1 224 taketh] f; takes q
228 removing] f; remouing of q 232 if] f; and if q a right] f; right q 233 harlotry] f,
q2; harlot q1

216 engines snares, plots                        234 He . . . fortune The implication seems
219 compass bounds (of what’s possible)             to be: ‘and therefore will not be protected
224 Mauretania i.e. the land of the Moors           by a train of followers (as the governor
   in North Africa. There is no other evi-          would normally be)’.
   dence that this is Othello’s intention, and   235 fall out occur
   it may simply be Iago’s ﬁction designed to    238 amazed bewildered
   goad Roderigo into action.                    240 put inﬂict
225 abode be lingered stay be prolonged          241 high supper time high [fully] time
227 determinate decisive                            for supper; Andrews suggests high
229 uncapable . . . place In the context of         supper = feast (by analogy with ‘high
   the bawdy meaning acquired by ‘place’            tea’), but OED provides no warrant for
   (see 2.3.306–7 3.3.250–1, 4.1.253) this          this.
   may seem to hint at castration.               241–2 grows to waste is wasting away (and
233 harlotry harlot                                 we are wasting our time)

                                             355
4.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

roderigo I will hear further reason for this.
iago And you shall be satisﬁed.                                             Exeunt

4.3    Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia,
       and attendants
lodovico
  I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
othello
  O, pardon me, ’twill do me good to walk.
lodovico
  Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship.
desdemona
  Your honour is most welcome.
othello                           Will you walk, sir?—
  O Desdemona!
desdemona         My lord?
othello                    Get you to bed                                                      5
  On th’instant; I will be returned forthwith:
  Dismiss your attendant there—look’t be done.         Exit
desdemona I will, my lord.
emilia
  How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
desdemona
  He says he will return incontinent,                                                         10
  And hath commanded me to go to bed,
  And bid me to dismiss you.
emilia                         Dismiss me?
desdemona
  It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia,
  Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu:
244 Exeunt] f, q2; Ex. Iag. and Rod. q1
  4.3] f (Scena Tertia); not in q 0.1–2 Enter . . . attendants] f; Enter Othello, Desdemona,
Lodouico . . . and Attendants. q1 (after ‘about it’, 4.2.242), q2 (at this point) 2 ’twill] f; it
shall q 7 Dismiss] f; dispatch q 11 And] f; He q 12 bid] f; bad q

244 satisﬁed Sardonically picking up              10 incontinent immediately. Although
   Roderigo’s demand for ‘satisfaction’ (l.          Desdemona cannot intend it, the adjecti-
   200), but perhaps with a sexual innuendo          val meaning ‘wanting in sexual restraint’
   (cf. 3.3.392 ff.).                                is difﬁcult to exclude in the context of the
4.3.0.1 Enter . . . attendants Q’s placing of        brothel scene and Desdemona’s prepara-
   this entry after l. 242 of the previous           tions for bed.
   scene is a reminder of the artiﬁciality of     14 nightly wearing nightclothes
   F’s scene divisions in the continuous stag-
   ing of Shakespeare’s theatre.

                                              356
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.3

  We must not now displease him.                                                               15
emilia
  I would you had never seen him.
desdemona
  So would not I: my love doth so approve him
  That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns—
  Prithee unpin me—have grace and favour in them.
emilia
  I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.                                            20
desdemona
  All’s one, good faith, how foolish are our minds!
  If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me
  In one of these same sheets.
emilia                           Come, come, you talk!
desdemona
  My mother had a maid called Barbary;
16 I would] q1; I, would f; Would q2; Ay, would knight 18 his frowns] f; and frownes q
19 in them] q; not in f 20 those] f, q2; these q1 21 All . . . how] This edition; All’s one:
good Father, how f; All’s one good faith: how q1; All’s one, goodfather; how q2 22 before
thee] q; before f 23 these] f; those q

17 approve commend (OED v. 6). The more             23 you talk how you prattle!
    usual senses of the verb at this time are       24–9 My mother . . . mind It is difﬁcult to
    probably also present: ‘prove to be true’,         account for the presence of these lines in
    ‘put to the text of experience’ (OED v. 1,         Q, unless the singing of the Willow Song
    8).                                                was always intended to have been part of
18 checks reproofs, rebuffs                            this scene, rather than being added (as
19, 32 unpin Usually played (since the time of         Coghill and others supposed) in the revi-
    Ellen Terry at least) as a direction to unpin      sion that supposedly lay behind F. The
    Desdemona’s hair; but OED entries (v.              parallel excision of the dying Emilia’s
    3–4) suggest that from the 16th century to         echo of this scene at 5.2.245–7 makes it
    the 18th it referred to the unpinning of a         virtually certain that a deliberate cut was
    lady’s dress. Fashionable clothes at this          involved. Cf. also l. 100 n.
    time were assembled from discrete bodices,      24 Barbary Alternative form of Barbara.
    sleeves, etc., held together by pins.              The name is strangely evocative in this
19 grace and favour A standard colloca-                play, however, since it recalls the ‘Bar-
    tion, normally referring to the good will          bary Moors’ of North Africa, and Iago’s
    and generosity of a monarch (see e.g.              description of Othello as a ‘Barbary
    Richard III, 3.4.91; Trag. Lear, 1.1.229);         horse’ (1.1.111) and an ‘erring barbarian’
    here both words = ‘attractiveness, charm,          (1.3.348–9). Black body-servants were
    beauty’, but are also coloured by the more         becoming fashionable in this period, and
    usual meaning of the phrase.                       perhaps we should think of Barbary as a
20 sheets . . . bed Honigmann suggests                 black maid, like Zanche in Webster’s
    that ‘[p]erhaps the bed is already visible’;       White Devil. Interestingly enough this was
    but this is to miss an important aspect of         the assumption made by Le Tourneur
    the play’s technique in which the mar-             whose French translation (1776) adds the
    riage bed is made constantly present to            words ‘C’étoit une Moresse, une pauvre
    the minds of the audience from the open-           Moresse’ (‘She was a Moorish woman, a
    ing scene, but is withheld from view until         poor Moorish woman’) to Desdemona’s
    the climactic ‘discovery’ of 5.2 (see              speech (Furness, p. 389).
    Introduction, pp. 134–6).

                                                357
4.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  She was in love, and he she loved proved mad,                                             25
  And did forsake her. She had a ‘Song of Willow’—
  An old thing ’twas, but it expressed her fortune,
  And she died singing it. That song tonight
  Will not go from my mind. I have much to do
  But to go hang my head all at one side                                                    30
  And sing it like poor Barbary: prithee dispatch.
emilia
  Shall I go fetch your nightgown?
desdemona                           No, unpin me here.
  This Lodovico is a proper man.
emilia
  A very handsome man.
desdemona                  He speaks well.
emilia I know a lady in Venice would have walked
    barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.                                    35
desdemona (sings)
  The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,

26 had] f, q2; has q1 29–48 I . . . next] f, q2; not in q1 33 This . . . proper man] f, q2;
assigned to Emilia honigmann (conj. Ridley) 35 barefoot] f; barefooted q2 37 sings] q2; not
in f 37–52 The . . . men] lyrics in italic f, q2 37 sighing] q2; singing f (corr.); sining f
(uncorr.)


25 mad Probably ‘wild’ or ‘extravagantly             mona in 2.3. But there is no reason why
   imprudent’ (OED a. 7, 2) rather than              Desdemona’s mood of pained nostalgia
   ‘lunatic’.                                        should not carry her into a half-conscious
26–7 Willow . . . fortune The willow was             regret for the ‘many noble matches’
   a traditional emblem for the grief of lost        which, as Emilia has reminded her, she
   or unrequited love (cf. Twelfth Night,            rejected in order to marry Othello
   1.5.257–60; Hamlet, 4.7.138–47).                  (4.2.125).
29–48, 50–2, 55–8 For the probability that           proper A quibble is involved: while Des-
   these lines, including the entire Willow          demona probably means ‘excellent; of
   Song, were cut from the Q text, see ll.           good character, honest, respectable, wor-
   24–9 n., and App. B, pp. 418–19.                  thy’ (OED a. 8a-b), Emilia chooses to
29–30 I . . . hang I can hardly restrain             understand her as meaning ‘ﬁne-looking,
   myself from hanging                               handsome, elegant’ (OED a. 9).
30 hang . . . side i.e. in the traditional pos-   35–6 walked . . . Palestine i.e. like a peni-
   ture of love melancholy                           tential pilgrim
32 nightgown See 1.1.158.1 n.                     37–52 The poor . . . men Adapted, like
33 This . . . proper man Honigmann (fol-             many of Shakespeare’s best-known
   lowing Ridley’s conjecture) reassigns             songs, from a traditional ballad. See App.
   these words (which appear only in F) to           D (iv).
   Emilia on the grounds that ‘[f]or Desde-       37 sycamore Originally the Syco-morus
   mona to praise Lodovico at this point             (ﬁg-mulberry), by this time also used
   seems out of character’. In this case Des-        of the maple species to which it now
   demona’s ‘He speaks well’ would become            usually refers. Both were prized as shade
   a polite deﬂection, like Cassio’s replies to      trees, thus either might provide the
   Iago’s nudging remarks about Desde-               shadows sought by the melancholy;

                                              358
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 4.3

     Sing all a green willow.
  Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee;
     Sing willow, willow, willow.                                                         40
  The fresh streams ran by her and murmured her moans;
     Sing willow, willow, willow.
  Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones.
     Sing willow—
  (Speaks)           Lay by these—
                                    (sings) willow, willow.
  (Speaks) Prithee, hie thee: he’ll come anon.                                             45
     (Sings) Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
  Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve—
  (Speaks) Nay, that’s not next.—Hark, who is’t that
           knocks?
emilia It’s the wind.
desdemona (sings)
  I called my love ‘false love’; but what said he then?                                    50
     Sing willow, willow, willow.
  If I court more women, you’ll couch with more men.
  (Speaks) So get thee gone, goodnight. Mine eyes do itch:
  Doth that bode weeping?
emilia                       ’Tis neither here nor there.
desdemona
  I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!                                        55

40, 51 Sing . . . willow] q2; Sing Willough, &c. f 44 Sing willow] oxford; Sing Willough, &c.
f, q2 44, 45, 46, 53 Speaks] not in f, q2 44, 46, 50 sings] not in f, q2 48 who is’t] f; who’s
q 49 It’s] f; It is q1; T’is q2 50–2 I . . . men] f, q2; not in q1 50 ‘false love’] f (False
Loue); false q2 53 So] f, q2; Now q1 54 Doth] f; does q 55–8 desdemona I . . . ques-
tion] f, q2; not in q1

   neither has any established connection        43 Her . . . stones Cf. Dent D618, ‘Constant
   with love-melancholy, except via the             dropping will wear the stone’; an implicit
   quibble (sick-amour) suggested by F’s            allusion to H311, ‘A heart as hard as
   spelling, ‘sicamour’, which apparently           stone’ is also involved.
   licenses the same association in Romeo        44 Lay by these put these away
   (1.1.118). The pun may be complicated         45 hie thee hurry up
   here by a false etymology linking morus =        anon any minute
   mulberry (Latin) with morus = Moor            47–8 Let . . . next Honigmann draws atten-
   (Med. Latin); see Patricia Parker, ‘What’s       tion to Desdemona’s ‘Freudian slip’: the
   in a Name: and More’, Revista de la              misplaced line signiﬁcantly looks forward
   Sociedad Española de Estudios Renacentistas      to her self-abnegating absolution of
   Ingleses, ed. Pilar Cuder Domínguez et al.,      Othello at 5.2.124–5.
   SEDERI 11 (2002), 101–50. Cf. 2.1.221,        52 couch lie, copulate (from French
   5.2.224.                                         coucher)
                                                 54 ’Tis . . . there Proverbial phrase: Dent
38 a Common abbreviation for of.                    H438.

                                             359
4.3                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Dost thou in conscience think—tell me Emilia—
  That there be women do abuse their husbands
  In such gross kind?
emilia                 There be some such, no question.
desdemona
  Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
emilia
  Why, would not you?
desdemona                 No, by this heavenly light.                                         60
emilia
  Nor I neither, by this heavenly light:
  I might do’t as well i’th’ dark.
desdemona
  Wouldst thou do such a thing for all the world?
emilia
  The world’s a huge thing: it is a great price
  For a small vice.
desdemona          God’s troth, I think thou wouldst not.                                      65
emilia By my troth, I think I should, and undo’t when I
  had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a


58 kind] f; kindes q2 59 deed] f, q2; thing q1 62 do’t as well] f, q1 (doe it as well); as
well doe it q2 63 thing] q1; deed f, q2 65 God’s troth] This edition; Introth f, q2 (In
troth); Good troth q1 66 By my troth] q1; Introth f, q2 (In troth) 67 done] f; done it q



60–2 Why . . . dark Hongimann argues                  with Iago at 3.3.304–5; F’s deed can then
   that the (admittedly suspicious) repetition        be explained as a careless repetition of the
   of l. 59 at l. 63 indicates a passage of can-      phrasing remembered from l. 61. Q2’s
   celled text which F copied from Q (Texts,          transposition of the two words presum-
   pp. 34–5). He may be correct but his argu-         ably results from compositorial careless-
   ment that ‘[a]fter what has happened not           ness (cf. Kellner, pp. 151–2).
   even someone as slow-witted as Emilia           64–5 The . . . vice Q’s lineation makes a
   could make a joke of Desdemona’s mari-             doggerel couplet appropriate to Emilia’s
   tal ﬁdelity’ (Texts, p. 35) makes insuff-          mock-smugness.
   icient allowance for the half-playful           64 price ‘Price’ and ‘prize’ were originally
   tone with which Desdemona covers her               variant spellings of the same word; either
   own anguish, and seems (like his re-               sense will ﬁt here.
   assignment of l. 33) to depend on a senti-      65 God’s The fact that F prints ‘In’ here
   mentalization of Desdemona’s chastity.             while Q prints ‘Good’ suggests that (as
   For a rebuttal of Honigmann, emphasiz-             at 4.2.148) the editor was expurgating
   ing that ‘performers have been playing             blasphemy, and that Q resulted from a
   these lines as written for centuries’, see         misreading.
   McMillin, Q, p. 12.                             66 By my troth Evidently altered as a pro-
63 thing Q’s thing seems justiﬁed by the way          fanity in F and Q2.
   Emilia picks it up in the following line,       67 done ﬁnished. The bawdy sense of do is
   creating an odd echo of her exchange               also involved.

                                               360
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   4.3

  joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns,
  petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for all
  the whole world? ’Ud’s pity, who would not make her                                        70
  husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should
  venture purgatory for’t.
desdemona
  Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong
  For the whole world!
emilia Why, the wrong is but a wrong i’th’ world; and                                         75
  having the world for your labour, ’tis a wrong in your
  own world, and you might quickly make it right.
desdemona
  I do not think there is any such woman.
emilia
  Yes, a dozen—and as many to th’ vantage,
  As would store the world they played for.                                                  80
  But I do think it is their husbands’ faults
68 joint-ring, nor] f (ioynt Ring); ioynt ring; or q 69 petticoats] f, q2; or Petticotes
q1 petty] f, q2; such q1 all] f; not in q 70 ’Ud’s pity] q1; why f, q2 81–98 But . . . so]
f, q2; not in q1

68 joint-ring Or ‘gimmal ring’; made in two           power will I give thee, and the glory of
   parts, often decorated with two clasped            those kingdoms’ (Luke 4: 5–6; Geneva
   hands holding a heart and used to sym-             version).
   bolize the union of lovers (ﬁrst recorded       70 ’Ud’s God’s
   use in OED). Cf. Dryden, Don Sebastian,         72 venture purgatory risk being con-
   5.1: ‘Those rings . . . a curious artist           demned to the punishments of purgatory.
   wrought them | With joints so close as             Ironic, not just because of Emilia’s allu-
   not to be perceived: | Yet are they both           sions to satanic temptation, but because
   each other’s counterpart; | Her part had           of what she has already risked to make
   Juan inscribed, and his had Zaida                  her husband a mere lieutenant.
   | . . . and in the midst | A heart divided in   73 Beshrew me Cf. 3.4.146.
   two parts was placed.’                          79–80 Yes . . . for Treated as prose in F, Q
   lawn A ﬁne and costly white linen.                 and most editions; but, as Honigmann
69 caps Associated with the vanity of                 notes, a prose beginning to a verse speech
   fashion and conspicuous consumption in             is unusual, and if world is treated as
   e.g. Shrew, 4.3.63–85.                             disyllabic (a pronunciation encouraged
   petty exhibition trivial reward or gift            by the rolled Elizabethan r) two passable
   (OED n. 2); perhaps coloured by the sense          pentameter lines result. Alternatively, a
   of ‘display’ (not before 1663 in OED, but          brief reﬂective pause before the next part
   available from the verb exhibit).                  of the speech would be dramatically
69–70 all . . . world The wording recalls             appropriate.
   Matthew 16: 26: ‘what doth it proﬁt man         79 to th’ vantage in addition
   if he win all the whole world and lose his      80 store stock, populate
   own soul’ (Bishops’ Bible); but the situa-         played (a) gambled; (b) copulated
   tion, together with Emilia’s talk of mak-        81–98 But . . . so Of all the long passages
   ing her husband ‘a monarch’, recalls               missing from Q, this one seems most
   Satan’s temptation of Christ, when ‘the            plausible as a possible addition; especially
   devil . . . showed him all the kingdoms            because Emilia’s previous two speeches
   of the world. . . . And . . . said, All this       are in prose and ll. 79–80 are printed as

                                               361
4.3                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

  If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
  And pour our treasures into foreign laps,
  Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
  Throwing restraint upon us; or say they strike us,                                         85
  Or scant our former having in despite—
  Why, we have galls; and though we have some grace,
  Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know,
  Their wives have sense like them; they see, and smell,
  And have their palates both for sweet and sour                                             90
  As husbands have. What is it that they do,
  When they change us for others? Is it sport?
  I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
  I think it doth. Is’t frailty that thus errs?
  It is so too. And have not we affections,                                                  95
  Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
  Then let them use us well: else let them know,
  The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
desdemona
  Good night, good night. God me such uses send,
  Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend.          Exeunt                                100
99 God] q1; Heauen f, q2      uses] f, q2; vsage q1

   prose in both F and Q, so that her lengthy    84 peevish Cf. 2.3.176.
   verse meditation on the shortcomings of       86 scant . . . having reduce what was pre-
   husbands might easily be a later inser-           viously allowed us
   tion, designed to make Emilia’s role more     87–98 Why . . . so Often compared to
   sympathetic. On the other hand, Desde-            Shylock’s ‘Hath not a Jew eyes?’ speech
   mona’s ﬁnal couplet seems to follow more          (M. of V. 3.1.54–68), another appeal to
   naturally from Emilia’s own closing coup-         common humanity which is also a
   let than from ll. 79–80: not only do her          justiﬁcation of revenge.
   ‘uses’ (99) echo Emilia’s ‘use’ (97), but     87 galls spirit to resent injury
   the antithetical structure of l. 100, with        grace (a) physical charm; (b) mercy
   its repeated ‘bad’, seems designed to bal-    89 sense (a) physical senses; (b) sensual
   ance l. 98, with its repeated ‘ills’.             desires; (c) feelings; (d) reason
                                                 92, 96 sport (a) fun; (b) sexual indulgence
82 fall succumb sexually. Continues the          93 affection passion, lust
   motif of sin and temptation, since the Fall   94, 96 frailty (a) sexual susceptibility; (b)
   of Eve was often construed in sexual              moral or physical weakness. A joke about
   terms; Emilia wittily reverses the usual          the stereotype of women as ‘the weaker
   attribution of blame.                             sex’.
   duties marital (including sexual)             97 use treat. With a play on sexual use; cf.
   obligations                                       duties, l. 81.
83 pour . . . laps A bourgeois version of the    99 uses custom, habit, behaviour (OED n. 7,
   classical myth in which Danaë is impreg-          8)
   nated by the adulterous Jove in the form      100 Not . . . mend Not to imitate the bad
   of a shower of gold; for the vaginal sense        behaviour of others, but to learn from it
   of lap see Hamlet, 3.2.107–15 (and cf.            how to mend my own vices. Desdemona
   Williams, Dictionary, pp. 784–5, Glossary,        appears to respond directly to Emilia’s
   p. 182).                                          scenario of sexual tit-for-tat, thus render-

                                             362
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                        5.1

5.1     Enter Iago and Roderigo
iago
   Here, stand behind this balk; straight will he come.
  Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home—
   Quick, quick, fear nothing, I’ll be at thy elbow.
   It makes us or it mars us: think on that,
   And ﬁx most ﬁrm thy resolution.                                                                 5
roderigo
   Be near at hand, I may miscarry in’t.
iago
   Here, at thy hand: be bold and take thy stand.
        He retires
roderigo (aside)
   I have no great devotion to the deed,
   And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons—
   jAloudk ’Tis but a man gone: forth my sword, he dies!                                         10


5.1] f (Actus Quintus. Scene Prima.), q2 (Actus 5. Scoena 1.); Actus. 5. q1 1 balk] This edition;
Barke f; Bulke q 4 on] f; of q 5 most] f, q1; more q2 7 stand] f, q2; sword q1 71 He
retires] capell (subs.); not in f, q 8 deed] f, q2; dead q1 9 hath] f; has q


   ing it unlikely that ll. 81–98 were a later          stage in Elizabethan public playhouses.
   addition, and making a cut in Q once                 Not only could ‘u’ and ‘a’ be quite easily
   again more probable than F revision. Cf.             confused in a manuscript, but the variant
   also ll. 24–9.                                       spellings of balk recorded in OED include
                                                        ‘balke’, ‘bulk’, and ‘bauk’, so the same
5.1 This is one of three scenes (including              word is likely to lie behind both F and Q
    1.1 and 2.3) in which an exhilarated                readings. Most editors, however, prefer
    Iago orchestrates an explosion of public            ‘bulk’ = stall or framework projecting
    violence, and the second in which he                from a shop-front; in which case Iago and
    has Othello play the role of eavesdropp-            Roderigo may have hidden in the small
    ing spectator (ll. 28–37). But this is his          corner where the tiring-house projected
    masterpiece: here he manipulates, in                beyond the line of the playhouse
    the fashion of a busy puppeteer, a whole            galleries. For the alternative suggestion
    succession of characters (Roderigo,                 that the ‘bulk’ was a curtained booth
    Cassio, Lodovico and Gratiano, Bianca,              used in 5.2 to contain Desdemona’s bed,
    and Emilia), coolly murdering one and               see 5.2.0.1.
    probably wounding another in the                2   put thrust
    process. His apparently complete success        3   I’ll . . . elbow Dent EE5, ‘To be at one’s
    makes the unmasking of 5.2 appear                   elbow’; and cf. D243.1, ‘The devil is at
    even more sudden and catastrophic.                  one’s elbow’.
    Shakespeare’s technique here somewhat           4   makes . . . mars us Proverbial phrase:
    resembles that of Marlowe and Jonson                Dent M48.
    in the startling denouements of plays           9   satisfying Earliest citation of this adjecti-
    like The Jew of Malta, Volpone, and The             val participle in OED.
    Alchemist.                                    10    Aloud The whole of Roderigo’s speech is
 1 balk timber beam; here presumably                    usually treated as an aside, but Iago’s ‘he
    referring to one of the two large pillars           grows angry’ suggests that he is meant to
    that supported the ‘heavens’ over the               hear this line.

                                              363
5.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

iago (aside)
  I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense,
  And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
  Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
  Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
  He calls me to a restitution large                                                        15
  Of gold, and jewels, that I bobbed from him,
  As gifts to Desdemona—
  It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
  He hath a daily beauty in his life
  That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor                                                20
  May unfold me to him: there stand I in much peril—
  No, he must die. But so: I hear him coming.
        Enter Cassio
roderigo
  I know his gait, ’tis he. (Attacking Cassio) Villain, thou
     diest!
cassio
  That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
  But that my coat is better than thou know’st—                                             25
  I will make proof of thine.
        He wounds Roderigo


11 quat] f, q2; gnat q1 12 angry. Now whether] f; angry now: whether q1; angry, now,
whether q2 14 gain] f (gaine); game q 16 Of] f; For q 19 hath] f; has q 21 much] f,
q2; not in q1 22 But so] f; be’t so q; But soft dyce 1875 conj. hear] q (heare); heard f 23
Attacking Cassio] rowe (subs.); not in f, q 24 mine] f; my q 25 know’st] f, q2; think’st q1
26 He . . . Roderigo] capell (subs.); not in f, q


11 quat pimple, small boil (OED n.1 1); con-     25 coat . . . knowest Presumably Cassio is
   temptuous term for young man (OED n.1            wearing beneath his doublet a protective
   2; earliest example cited). Johnson identi-      coat of mail (or ‘privy coat’), like that
   ﬁed this as a Midlands dialect word.             worn by the honest captain Aquinus in
   to the sense to the quick                        Shirley’s The Politician (4.6), though he
14 makes my gain will proﬁt me                      may be referring simply to the thickness of
   Live Roderigo if Roderigo lives                  his padded doublet.
16 bobbed ﬁlched                                 26 make proof of test
17 As i.e. under the pretence that they were     26.1 Iago . . . exit Theobald’s direction has
19 daily constant; i.e. manifest in every-          been accepted by virtually all editors and
   thing he does                                    has become part of the standard stage-
21 unfold expose                                    business in this scene; but, although it
22 so so be it (OED 5e). Q’s Be’t so makes          sharpens the irony of Iago’s behaviour
   equally good sense and would be an easy          later in the scene, it has no clear warrant
   actor’s substitution, but it seems more          in the text.
   likely that a misreading lies behind either
   Q or F.

                                             364
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 5.1

roderigo                       O, I am slain!
        jIago wounds Cassio in the leg from behind, and exitk
cassio
  I am maimed for ever. Help, ho! Murder, murder!
        Enter Othello
othello (aside)
  The voice of Cassio: Iago keeps his word.
roderigo O, villain that I am.
othello (aside) It is even so.                                                              30
cassio O help, ho! Light! A surgeon!
othello (aside)
  ’Tis he: O brave Iago, honest and just,
  That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong,
  Thou teachest me!—Minion, your dear lies dead,
  And your unblest fate hies: strumpet, I come!                                             35
  Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
  Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust’s blood be spotted.
                                                           Exit
        Enter Lodovico and Gratiano
cassio
  What ho! No watch? No passage? Murder, murder!
gratiano
  ’Tis some mischance; the voice is very direful.
cassio O, help!                                                                            40
lodovico Hark!
26.1 Iago . . . exit] theobald (subs.); not in f, q 27 maimed] f (maym’d), q2; maind q1
Help] f; light q 30 It is] f; Harke tis q 35 unblest] f, q2; not in q1 hies] f, q2; hies apace
q1 36 Forth] q; For f 39 voice] f; cry q

28 Iago . . . word Iago has clearly arranged         probably also coloured by the common
   for Othello to be present at this scene: cf.      meaning ‘stigmatize, calumniate’ (v.
   4.1.203–4.                                        3b).
30 It . . . so Metrically amphibious. The         37 Thy . . . spotted Since blood can mean
   metre requires that even be treated as one        not only ‘desire’, but also ‘semen’
   syllable (‘e’en’ or ‘ev’n’).                      (because of the Pythagorean notion that
32 brave worthy                                      male seed was a concoction of the blood:
34 Minion mistress, paramour (addressed to           Williams, Dictionary pp. 113–16, Glossary,
   Desdemona)                                        pp. 44–5), Othello’s presentation of the
35 unblest i.e. damned                               murder, as both a properly symmetrical
   hies hurries on (to meet you)                     punishment for Desdemona’s adultery
36 Forth out                                         and as a perverse nuptial consummation,
   charms Not simply ‘charming things’,              is also a vicious tautology.
   but also ‘magical tokens’; picking up             spotted Echoes Othello’s description of
   the theme of witchcraft from 1.1.170–2,           the handkerchief at 3.3.436 (see note).
   1.2.72–9, 1.3.61–107, and 3.4.68–74.           38 passage passers by (OED n. 1b); cf.
   blotted effaced (OED v. 4). The sense is          Errors, 3.1.100.

                                              365
5.1                            Othello, the Moor of Venice

roderigo O wretched villain!
lodovico
  Two or three groan. It is a heavy night;
  These may be counterfeits: let’s think’t unsafe
  To come in to the cry without more help.                                                      45
roderigo
  Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
       Enter Iago with a light and his sword drawn
lodovico Hark!
gratiano
  Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
iago
  Who’s there? Whose noise is this that cries on murder?
lodovico
  We do not know.
iago                 Do not you hear a cry?                                                     50
cassio
  Here, here! For heaven sake help me!
iago                                      What’s the matter?
gratiano
  This is Othello’s ensign, as I take it.
lodovico
  The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
iago
  What are you here that cry so grievously?
cassio
  Iago? O, I am spoiled, undone by villains—                                                    55
  Give me some help!

43 groan] f (groane); grones q It is a] q; ’Tis f 46.1 Enter . . . drawn] This edition (after q,
‘Enter Iago with a light’); Enter Iago. f 48 light] f; lights q 50 We] f; I q Do] f; Did q
51 heaven] f; heauens q


43 It . . . night F leaves the line two                  to the ‘bulk’ or booth in which Cassio is
    syllables short, unlike Q’s perfectly iambic         lying.
    ‘It is a heavy night’. But the verse in         45   cry clamour, outcry
    this scene of confusion is often disturbed,     48   in his shirt i.e. night attire
    and a pause after ‘groan’ as Lodovico           49   cries on cries out against
    strains to listen might be dramatically         51   heaven sake The apostrophe s is often
    appropriate.                                         dropped before another s; but, as Honig-
    heavy (a) dark, gloomy; (b) distressful,             mann points out, this could also be an old
    unfortunate                                          genitive form.
45, 60 come in approach. Honigmann takes            55   spoiled destroyed, badly injured (OED v.1
    come in at l. 60 to mean ‘enter’ and to refer        10)

                                                366
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    5.1

iago
  O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?
cassio
  I think that one of them is hereabout
  And cannot make away.
iago                        O treacherous villains!
  jTo Lodovico and Gratianok
  What are you there? Come in and give some help.                                             60
roderigo
  O, help me there!
cassio               That’s one of them.
iago                                     O murd’rous slave!
  O villain!
        He stabs Roderigo
roderigo O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!
        jRoderigo groansk
iago
  Kill men i’th’ dark? Where be these bloody thieves?
  How silent is this town! Ho, murder, murder!
  (To Lodovico and Gratiano)
  What may you be? Are you of good or evil?                                                    65
lodovico
  As you shall prove us, praise us.
iago                                Signor Lodovico?
lodovico He, sir.
iago
  I cry you mercy—here’s Cassio hurt by villains.
57 me, lieutenant] f, q2; my Leiutenant q1 58 that] f; the q 60, 64 To . . . Gratiano]
theobald; not in f, q 61 there] f; here q 62 He stabs Roderigo] rowe (after q2, ‘Thrusts him
in.’); not in f, q1 dog!] f; dog,– o,o,o. q 62.1 Roderigo groans] This edition (after q, ‘o,o,o’);
not in f 63 men] f, q2; him q1 these] f; those q
57 O me ‘A “genteel” exclamation’                     considered part of the line, but rather
   (Honigmann).                                       as a form of direction, indicating that
   lieutenant Cf. 4.1.100.                            Roderigo’s groans should continue as
59 make away escape                                   Iago speaks. On this form of ‘crypto-
60 What . . . there The form of Iago’s                direction’ see Honigmann, ‘Re-enter the
   demand seems to parallel his challenge to          Stage Direction: Shakespeare and Some
   Cassio (l. 54), and to anticipate his later        Contemporaries’, SS 29 (1976), 117–25.
   challenge to Lodovico and Gratiano (l.             McMillin (Q, pp. 29–31) regards exclama-
   65); but, as Honigmann points out, it              tions of this kind as likely theatrical
   might also be punctuated ‘What, are you            interpolations.
   there?’ and understood as addressed to          66 prove ﬁnd by trial
   the ‘villains’.                                    praise appraise, value. Cf. Dent P614.2.
62.1 Roderigo groans Q’s ‘o, o, o’ is extra-       68 I . . . mercy I beg your pardon; ‘a “gen-
   metrical and should probably not be                teel” phrase’ (Honigmann).

                                              367
5.1                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

gratiano Cassio?
iago How is’t, brother?                                                                        70
cassio My leg is cut in two.
iago Marry, heaven forbid!
  Light, gentlemen: I’ll bind it with my shirt.
       Enter Bianca
bianca
  What is the matter, ho? Who is’t that cried?
iago
  Who is’t that cried?
bianca                 O my dear Cassio,                                                        75
  My sweet Cassio, O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.
iago
  O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
  Who they should be, that have thus mangled you?
cassio No.
gratiano
  I am sorry to ﬁnd you thus; I have been to seek you.                                         80
iago
  Lend me a garter. So.
       He binds Cassio’s leg
  O for a chair to bear him easily hence!
bianca
  Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
iago
  Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
  To be a party in this injury.                                                                 85


76 My sweet Cassio, O Cassio] f; O my sweet Cassio q 78 have thus] f; thus haue q 81–2
Lend . . . hence] f, q2; not in q1 81.1 He . . . leg] This edition; not in f, q 85 be . . . injury]
f; beare a part in this q1; beare a part in this iniurie q2


70 brother Cf. Giraldi, App. C, p. 443.            83 Alas . . . Cassio If Cassio is treated as
71 My . . . two Metrically amphibious. Cf.            disyllabic then Bianca’s speech will
   Giraldi, App. C, p. 443.                           form a single pentameter line with a
78 mangled mutilated                                  feminine ending (as in F and Q);
80 I am . . . seek you The metre requires             however, treating it as trisyllabic (as it is
   elision of both I am and I have.                   in ll. 75, 86 for example) enables Bianca to
82, 96–7 chair Some sort of sedan chair               complete Iago’s half-line, while her cry
   (carried on poles) must be intended,               ‘O . . . Cassio’ becomes a complete line on
   though OED does not list this meaning              its own.
   before 1634.                                    84 trash Cf. 2.1.294.
82 easily comfortably, carefully; without
   difﬁculty

                                              368
                           Othello, the Moor of Venice                                5.1

  Patience a while, good Cassio! (To Lodovico and Gratiano)
         Come, come,
  Lend me a light: (Going to Roderigo) know we this face, or
         no?
  Alas, my friend and my dear countryman,
  Roderigo! No?—Yes, sure!—O heaven, Roderigo!
gratiano What, of Venice?                                                               90
iago Even he, sir—did you know him?
gratiano Know him? Ay.
iago
  Signor Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon:
  These bloody accidents must excuse my manners
  That so neglected you.
gratiano                    I am glad to see you.                                       95
iago
  How do you, Cassio? jCallingk O, a chair, a chair!
gratiano                                            Roderigo?
iago
  He, he, ’tis he.
         Enter attendants with a chair
                    O, that’s well said—the chair!
  Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
  I’ll fetch the general’s surgeon. (To Bianca) For you,
         mistress,
  Save you your labour.—He that lies slain here, Cassio,                              100
  Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
cassio
  None in the world; nor do I know the man.
iago (to Bianca)
  What? Look you pale? (To attendants) O, bear him out
         o’th’ air!

86 Come, come] f, q2; not in q1 87 Going . . . Roderigo] oxford; not in f, q 89 O heaven]
q1; Yes, ’tis f, q2 93 your] f; you q 97 He, he] f; He q Enter . . . chair] capell (subs.);
not in f, q the] f; a q 101 between] f; betwixt q 103 out] q; not in f


91 Even . . . him Metrically amphibious.          don’t trouble yourself (by trying to help
93–5 Signor . . . you Iago at his most            Cassio any more)
   courtly and deferential.                    103 bear . . . air Fresh air was supposed to
94 accidents unlucky events, disasters            be dangerous for the sick and wounded
97 well said well done                            (cf. Tilley A93).
99–100 For . . . labour as for you, madam,

                                           369
5.1                            Othello, the Moor of Venice

  (To Lodovico and Gratiano)
  Stay you, good gentlemen.
                      Exeunt attendants with Cassio in the chair
                                    jand the body of Roderigok
                   (To Bianca) Look you pale, mistress?
  (To Lodovico and Gratiano) Do you perceive the gastness of
       her eye?                                                                              105
  (To Bianca) Nay, if you stare we shall hear more anon.
  (To Lodovico and Gratiano) Behold her well, I pray you,
       look upon her:
  Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness
  Will speak though tongues were out of use.
       Enter Emilia
emilia
  ’Las, what’s the matter? What’s the matter, husband?                                       110
iago
  Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
  By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped:
  He’s almost slain, and Roderigo quite dead.
emilia
  Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!
iago
  This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,                                             115
  Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.
  (To Bianca) What, do you shake at that?

104 gentlemen] f; Gentlewoman q Exeunt . . . Roderigo] walker (subs.); not in f, q 105
gastness] f (gastnesse); ieastures q 106 if you stare] f; an you stirre q hear] f (heare);
haue q 107 well, I pray you, look] honigmann; well: I pray you looke f; well I pray you,
looke q 109.1 Enter Emilia] q; not in f 110 ’Las, what’s] q; Alas, what is f What’s] q;
What is f 111 hath] f; has q 113 quite dead] f; dead q 115 fruits] f; fruite q Prithee]
f, q2; pray q1


104 Stay you don’t leave. In the Q version          109 though . . . use even if human beings
   Bianca attempts to slip away with Cassio,           were to lose the power of speech
   but is prevented by Iago.                        113 He’s . . . dead Most editors follow Q in
105 gastness terriﬁed appearance                       omitting quite, but the line has a nice
106 if . . . anon Presumably Iago means                rhetorical balance if extra stress is given
   that Bianca’s wildly staring eyes are an            to ‘almost’ and ‘quite’; as in the previous
   indication of guilt and that they can               line, Roderigo is scanned as trisyllabic,
   expect her to confess shortly. If Q’s ‘stirre’      with a stress on the ﬁrst, and the second
   (an easy aural mistake) is correct, then            elided.
   Bianca is struggling to escape, and Iago         115 This is the fruits The F reading is made
   suggests that if she succeeds they can              more probable by Richard III, 2.1.136:
   expect to hear of more outrage before               ‘This is the fruits of rashness’.
   long.                                            116 know of learn from

                                                370
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   5.1

bianca
  He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
iago
  O did he so? I charge you go with me.
emilia
  O, ﬁe upon thee, strumpet!
bianca                         I am no strumpet,                                           120
  But of life as honest as you that thus
  Abuse me.
emilia        As I? Foh! Fie upon thee!
iago
  Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dressed.
  (To Bianca) Come, mistress, you must tell’s another
     tale.—
  Emilia, run you to the citadel                                                           125
  And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.
                                                  Exit Emilia
  (To Lodovico and Gratiano)
  Will you go on afore? (Aside) This is the night

120 O, ﬁe] f; Fie, ﬁe q1; Fie q2 122 Foh] q1; not in f; now q2 126 hath] f; has q         126.1
Exit Emilia] oxford (after ‘afore’, l. 127); not in f, q 127 afore] f; I pray q



119 charge command                                  all women as whores) visits on herself.
120, 122 thee The venom of Emilia’s sudden          Bianca’s insistence on her own dignity,
   attack on Bianca is emphasized by her use        like her apparently genuine love for Cas-
   of the contemptuous second person                sio, makes her claim to ‘honesty’ seem (in
   pronoun.                                         at least one sense of this by now compli-
120–2 I . . . Abuse me Though Bianca’s              cated word) entirely justiﬁed.
   liaison with Cassio opens her to the          122 Abuse (a) malign; (b) mistreat. The
   charge of whoredom in the broad sense,           word has gathered ironic resonances
   the question of whether she is or is not         through its insistent use to describe not
   technically a prostitute has been exten-         Othello’s alleged seduction of Desdemona
   sively debated (see ‘Persons’). This is          (1.1.172; 1.2.74, 78; 1.3.61), Iago’s
   ﬁnally less important, however, than her         deception of Othello (1.3.384; 4.2.14,
   structural position as part of a trio of         142) and libelling of Cassio (2.1.297),
   women, all of whom are denounced as              Othello’s predicted failings as a husband
   whores by the men. Her claim to be as            (2.1.226), Desdemona’s alleged inﬁdelity
   honest (= chaste) as Emilia, who in the          and deception of Othello (3.3.151, 203,
   previous scene argued that any woman             270, 338), female inﬁdelity generally
   would prostitute herself if the price were       (4.3.57), and the self-corruption of
   high enough, draws attention to the rela-        Othello’s jealousy (4.2.14).
   tive nature of that absolutist concept; and   123 Cassio dressed i.e. his wounds
   this simple irony is complicated by the       124 tell’s . . . tale make a true confession to
   suggestion that Emilia is merely displac-        us. Ironic use of a proverbial expression
   ing on to an even more vulnerable                (Dent T49) meaning something like ‘sing
   woman the insults that Iago (who regards         another song’ or ‘change your tune’.

                                             371
5.1                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

   That either makes me, or fordoes me quite.
               Exeunt Lodovico and Gratiano, followed by Iago

5.2      Enter Othello with a light, and Desdemona in her bed
         asleep
othello
  It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul—
  Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars:
  It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood,
  Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow
  And smooth as monumental alabaster—                                                           5
  Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men.
  Put out the light, and then put out the light—
128 makes] f, q2; markes q1 128.1 Exeunt . . . Iago] This edition; Exeunt f, q
   5.2] f (Scœna Secunda.); not in q 0.1–2 Enter . . . bed] after f (Enter Othello, and Desdemona
in her bed.) and q (Enter Othello with a light.) 0.2 asleep] rowe; not in f, q

128 fordoes ruins; kills                              (1861) required the use of a mirror to indi-
   quite utterly                                      cate that the cause lay in the colour of his
128.1 followed by Iago The order of depar-            skin.
   ture is clearly indicated by the implied       1, 3 cause (a) reason, motive; (b) end or pur-
   stage direction in Iago’s ‘Will you go on          pose; legal case or suit, matter of dispute;
   afore?’; Iago’s aside will be spoken as the        charge, accusation (OED n. 1, 3, 4, 7–8,
   others make their exit.                            9). Cf. 3.3.413.
5.2 The lineation of the dialogue in this          4 whiter . . . snow Cf. Dent S591, ‘As
   scene varies signiﬁcantly between F and            white as the driven snow’. The proverb
   Q; neither seems wholly satisfactory, but          also exists in the form ‘As pure as the
   most editorial attempts at rearrangement           driven snow’, and the association with
   have only created new irregularities of            purity and chastity is borne out by Cym-
   their own. This edition, therefore, whilst         beline, 2.5.13 (‘As chaste as unsunned
   making free use of both F and Q, general-          snow’) and Kinsmen 5.3.3–4 (‘white as
   ly avoids the relineation of later editors.        chaste, and pure | As wind-fanned
   In fact it is not uncommon in later                snow’). Othello’s physical obsession with
   Shakespeare for versiﬁcation to become             Desdemona’s fairness is painfully compli-
   highly irregular in episodes of emotional          cated by the moral symbolism of colour
   stress, lines of apparent prose being              he has absorbed from Iago.
   mixed with lines of fairly regular verse.       5 monumental alabaster Alabaster was
   Moreover, a writer accustomed to iambic            the preferred stone for tomb sculpture,
   rhythms will often write a highly                  and Othello’s simile draws attention to
   cadenced prose, making the verse–prose             the resemblance between the sleeping
   distinction an even more uncertain one.            Desdemona and the prostrate ﬁgures
0.1 in her bed See App. F(iv) for a discussion        displayed on the bed-like ‘tester tombs’
   of the staging here, and also Introduc-            fashionable at this time. For the pro-
   tion, pp. 173–4.                                   verbial whiteness and smoothness of
1–2 It . . . stars Othello implies that to            alabaster, see Dent A95.1–2.
   name the cause would affront the chastity       7 Put . . . and . . . light First put out this
   of the stars; but there is a strong sugges-        candle, and then snuff out her life. Apart
   tion that it is something he cannot bring          from the erotic associations of torches
   himself to name, either because he fears           noted at 1.2.28, the use of an extin-
   to confront it, or because the true ‘cause’        guished candle, torch, or lamp as a sym-
   of his actions remains in some deep sense          bol for death is an ancient one which
   obscure to him. Fechter’s acting edition           occurs in classical and neoclassical tomb

                                             372
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 5.2

   If I quench thee, thou ﬂaming minister,
   I can again thy former light restore,
   Should I repent me; but once put out thine,                                              10
   Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature,
   I know not where is that Promethean heat
   That can thy light relume. When I have plucked thy
         rose,
   I cannot give it vital growth again,
   It needs must wither: I’ll smell thee on the tree—                                       15
         He kisses her
   O balmy breath, that dost almost persuade


10 thine] q; thy Light f 11 cunning’st] f, q2; cunning q1 13 relume] f; returne q1;
relumine q2 thy rose] f; the rose q 15 needs must] f; must needes q thee] f; it q He
kisses her] q2 (subs.); not in f, q1 16 O] f (Oh); A q dost] f; doth q



   sculpture, as well as in scripture (‘How oft      creator     of   humankind         (Mowat–
   shall the candle of the wicked be put out?        Werstine).
   and their destruction come upon them?’,        13 relume relight. Earliest citation in OED.
   Job 21: 17); cf. also Macbeth, 5.5.22 (‘Out,   13–15 When . . . wither The withered rose
   out, brief candle’), and see Dent CC1. The        was a conventional emblem for death in
   gesture may also symbolize the extinction         the memento mori tradition; but the pluck-
   of Othello’s ‘light of reason’.                   ing of a rose could also be a metaphor for
                                                     the taking of virginity, a double entendre
 8 minister servant; magistrate, minister of         emphasized by F’s ‘thy rose’ (where Q
   justice (OED n. 1, 2c). Cf. also Psalms           prints ‘the rose’). As numerous critics
   104: 4 (‘[God] maketh the spirits his mes-        have observed, part of the shock of Desde-
   sengers, and a ﬂaming ﬁre his ministers’);        mona’s murder depends upon the way
   and Hebrews 1: 7 (‘He maketh the spirits          in which killing is elided with sexual
   his messengers, and his ministers a ﬂame          consummation.
   of ﬁre’).                                      15 smell thee An implicit stage direction.
10 thine Most editors prefer F’s thy light; but      Kemble insisted that Othello must bend
   apart from its metrical awkwardness, this         over Desdemona at this point (Hankey,
   reading results in a somewhat inelegant           p. 311); and, in a detail later imitated
   repetition at l. 13; it is quite possibly a       by Patrick Stewart, Olivier deliberately
   scribal or compositorial error produced           anticipated the gesture when he made his
   by contamination from ‘the light . . .            ﬁrst entry inhaling the fragrance of a red
   thy . . . light’ (7–9).                           rose (Pechter, pp. 143–4). F’s ‘thee’
11 cunning’st . . . nature most exquisitely          expresses a tenderness and intimacy
   formed example of nature’s craftsman-             absent from Q’s ‘it’.
   ship when she excels herself. But cunning      16 balmy deliciously sweet; soothing, heal-
   is inevitably also coloured by its negative       ing. Various aromatic balms were used in
   meanings; cf. 4.2.90, ‘that cunning               contemporary medicine; but the use of
   whore of Venice’.                                 such resins in embalming creates an
12 Promethean Prometheus was the                     uncanny resonance with the mysterious
   Greek hero who stole ﬁre from the                 ‘mummy’ in which Desdemona’s hand-
   gods and gave it to humans; he was                kerchief was dyed. See also 5.2.349–50 n.
   punished by Zeus who chained him up               Sweet breath was frequently eroticized in
   in Hades where an eagle fed perpetually           the period, no doubt because it was such a
   on his liver. A second myth made him              rarity.

                                              373
5.2                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

  Justice to break her sword—one more, one more!
        jHe kisses herk
  Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee
  And love thee after—one more, and that’s the last.
        He kisses her
  So sweet was ne’er so fatal. I must weep,                                                20
  But they are cruel tears: this sorrow’s heavenly,
  It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
desdemona
  Who’s there? Othello?
othello                    Ay, Desdemona.
desdemona
  Will you come to bed, my lord?
othello
  Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?
desdemona                                  Ay, my lord.                                    25
othello
  If you bethink yourself of any crime
  Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
  Solicit for it straight.
desdemona
  Alack, my lord, what may you mean by that?
othello
  Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by:                                               30
  I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit,
  No—heavens forfend!—I would not kill thy soul.

17 Justice] f; Iustice her selfe q sword—one more, one more] f (Sword. One more, one
more); sword once more q1; sword: one more q2 He kisses her] This edition; not in f, q
19 one more, and that’s] f; once more, and this q1; one more, and this q2 He kisses her] q1
(next to ll. 19–20); not in f, q2 22 where it doth] f; when it does q1; where it does q2 She
wakes] f, q; as direction cambridge 25 Desdemon] f; Desdemona q 29 Alack] f; Alas q
32 heavens] f; heauen q


17 Justice . . . sword Alluding to the alle-         12: 6 (‘whom the Lord loveth, he chas-
   gorical ﬁgure of Justice as a blindfold           teneth’), Revelation 3: 19 (‘As many as I
   woman with scales (for weighing the               love, I rebuke and chasten’).
   truth) and a sword (for punishment).        25    Desdemon By forcing a heavy stress on
20 fatal ominous; destructive, deadly;               the second syllable, the metre brings out
   doomed (OED a. 4c, 6, 2)                          the dangerous pun latent in the name.
21–2 sorrow’s . . . love A recurrent theme      27   grace The property in God which allows
   in Scripture: see e.g. Psalms 94: 12              him to grant forgiveness to penitent
   (‘Blessed is the man, whom thou chastis-          sinners.
   est’), Proverbs 3: 12 (‘For the Lord cor-    28   Solicit plead (for absolution)
   recteth him, whom he loveth’), Hebrews       32   forfend forbid

                                           374
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  5.2

desdemona
  Talk you of killing?
othello                Ay, I do.
desdemona                       Then heaven
  Have mercy on me.
othello                Amen, with all my heart.
desdemona
  If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.                                               35
othello Humh!
desdemona
  And yet I fear you, for you’re fatal then
  When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know not,
  Since guiltiness I know not; but yet I feel I fear.
othello Think on thy sins.                                                                 40
desdemona They are loves I bear to you.
othello Ay, and for that thou diest.
desdemona
  That death’s unnatural that kills for loving.
  Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
  Some bloody passion shakes your very frame:                                               45
  These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
  They do not point on me.
othello Peace, and be still.
desdemona I will so. What’s the matter?

35 so] q; not in f 42 Ay] f; not in q 46 I hope, I hope] f; I hope q 49 will so. What’s] f
(will so: What’s); will, so, what’s q1; will so, what’s q2; will. So: what’s honigmann


33–4 heaven . . . me Honigmann com-                   perchance’ (3.3.2, pp. 840–1; emphasis
   pares the liturgical response from the             added). These are almost exactly the
   Anglican prayer book, ‘Lord have mercy             symptoms that an actor seeking to repre-
   upon us’.                                          sent jealousy is advised to display by
36 Humh (regarded as extra-metrical)                  Aaron Hill’s Thespian Praeceptor (1734),
38 eyes roll so For an account of the extrav-         which cites Othello as a case in point
   agant physical symptoms expected of the            (Potter, p. 25).
   jealous man, see Robert Burton’s Anato-       41   They . . . you ‘An allusion to the sin of
   my of Melancholy (1621): ‘Besides those            loving a human being more than God’
   strange gestures of staring, frowning,             (Sanders). Metrically amphibious.
   grinning, rolling of eyes, menacing, ghast-   44   why . . . lip Cf. Richard III, 4.2.28:
   ly looks, broken pace, interrupt, precipi-         ‘The king is angry. See, he gnaws his
   tate half-turns, [he] will sometimes sigh,         lip.’
   weep, sob for anger . . . curse, threaten,    47   point on me indicate my fate
   brawl, scold, ﬁght; and sometimes ﬂatter      48   Peace . . . still Metrically amphibious.
   again and speak fair . . . and then . . .          The words spoken by Christ to calm a
   rave, roar, and lay about him like a mad-          storm at sea (Mark 4: 39).
   man, thump her sides, drag her about

                                             375
5.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello
  That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee,                                          50
  Thou gav’st to Cassio.
desdemona                 No, by my life and soul—
  Send for the man, and ask him.
othello                             Sweet soul, take heed,
  Take heed of perjury: thou art on thy death-bed.
desdemona
  Ay, but not yet to die.
othello                  Yes, presently.
  Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin;                                                   55
  For to deny each article with oath
  Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
  That I do groan withal: thou art to die.
desdemona
  Then Lord have mercy on me.
othello                           I say, Amen.
desdemona
  And have you mercy too. I never did                                                        60
  Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio,
  But with such general warranty of heaven
  As I might love. I never gave him token.
othello
  By heaven I saw my handkerchief in’s hand.
  O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart,                                                 65
  And makes me call what I intend to do
54 Ay, but] f, q (I, but); I? But honigmann Yes] q; not in f 57 conception] f, q2; conceit
q1 59 Then Lord] q; O Heauen f 61 my] f, q2; thy q1 66 makes] f; makest q

52–3 Sweet . . . perjury To commit such a             metaphor for Iago’s plot and Othello’s
    sin at the point of death would ensure her        jealousy (cf. 1.3.392–3; 2.1.127–8,
    damnation.                                        3.4.137, 151, 156–7; 4.2.96).
54 presently immediately                         59   Then . . . me See ll. 33–4 n. Cf. Giraldi,
55, 59, 67 confess . . . Amen . . . sacriﬁce          App. C, p. 444.
    As the agent of heavenly sorrow (ll.         61   Offend sin against
    21–2), Othello casts himself in a priestly   62   warranty authorization, allowance
    role.                                        63   token keepsake, love-token
55 freely without reservation                    65   stone turn to stone (OED v. 2; earliest
56 article item or count in a criminal                citation); 4.1.176 (see note) suggests that
    indictment                                        F’s ‘my heart’ is correct, though Johnson
57 conception (a) belief; (b) plan; (c)               defended Q’s ‘thy heart’ on the grounds
    embryo, baby (OED n. 7, 9, 3). Sense (c)          that Desdemona by hardening her heart
    together with ‘groan’ in the following            undermines Othello’s priestly role as con-
    line, picks up the recurrent ﬁgure of             fessor and sacriﬁcer.
    obscene pregnancy and parturition as a

                                             376
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  5.2

  A murder, which I thought a sacriﬁce.
  I saw the handkerchief.
desdemona                  He found it then;
  I never gave it him—send for him hither;
  Let him confess a truth.
othello                    He hath confessed.                                              70
desdemona
  What, my lord?
othello            That he hath—’ud’s death!—used thee.
desdemona
  How? Unlawfully?
othello              Ay.
desdemona                He will not say so.
othello
  No, his mouth is stopped—
  Honest Iago hath ta’en order for’t.
desdemona
  O, my fear interprets—what, is he dead?                                                   75
othello
  Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
  Had stomach for them all.
desdemona
  Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone.

70 Let] f, q2; And let q1 hath] f; has q 71 hath . . . used thee.] alexander; hath vs’d
thee. f; hath—vds death. q1; hath—vsde thee. q2 75 O] f; not in q interprets] f; inter-
prets then q


70 a truth Honigmann amends to ‘the                 Othello, in his priestly role, who cannot
   truth’ on the grounds that F’s a represents      bear to speak the obscene words that
   a ‘common error’ deriving from Q (which          similarly upset Desdemona in the brothel
   once again prints a truth at l. 128);            scene (4.2.118–23, 161–2); the struggle
   however, ‘a truth’ was good idiomatic            for linguistic control registered here will
   usage (see e.g. LLL, 2.1.65; Romeo,              make his explosion at l. 79 (‘Out, strum-
   4.1.33; Merry Wives, 4.4.37; All’s Well,         pet!’) even more violent.
   5.3.210), and the indeﬁnite article gave it      used i.e. sexually
   a slightly different nuance: ‘Let him         74 ta’en order for’t seen to that
   admit to what we know to be true.’            76 Had . . . lives Cf. Dent H30, ‘As many as
71 ’ud’s death Corruption of ‘God’s death’.         there are hairs on the head’; Psalms 40:
   Ridley suggests that Q’s violent oath rep-       12 (‘My sins . . . are more in number than
   resents a misreading of the manuscript’s         the hairs of mine head’); and Luke 12:
   ‘usde the’ (i.e. ‘used thee’). But the lin-      7 (‘all the hairs of your head are
   eation adopted by Honigmann makes a              numbered: fear not therefore’).
   conﬂation of the Q and F readings met-        77 stomach (a) appetite, capacity; (b)
   rically attractive. The burst of mid-line        courage (OED n. 5, 8a)
   emotion marks the fact that it is now

                                             377
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello
  Out, strumpet!—Weep’st thou for him to my face?
desdemona jgrasping him in supplicationk
  O banish me, my lord, but kill me not!                                                      80
othello Down, strumpet!
desdemona
  Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight!
       jShe struggles with himk
othello Nay, if you strive—
desdemona
  But half an hour? But while I say one prayer?
othello It is too late.
       He smothers her
                        Being done, there is no pause.                                         85
desdemona O Lord, Lord, Lord!
emilia (within)
  My lord, my lord! What ho! My lord, my lord!
othello
  What noise is this? Not dead? Not yet quite dead?
  I that am cruel am yet merciful:
  I would not have thee linger in thy pain—                                                   90
  So, so.

79 Out] f; O q 79.1 grasping . . . supplication] This edition; not in f, q 82.1 She . . . him]
This edition; not in f, q 83 if] f; an q 84 hour? But] q1 (houre, but); houre. | Oth. Being
done, there is no pawse. | Des. But f, q2 85 He smothers her] f (Smothers her); he stiﬂes her q
Being . . . pause] as here This edition (conj. Amneus); after ‘houre’ (l. 87) f, q2; not in q1
86 O . . . Lord, Lord] q1; not in f, q2 87 emilia . . . within)] after f (Æmilia at the doore.), q
(Emillia calls within.) 88 noise] f; voyce q 89 that am] f (corr.), q; am that f (uncorr.)


85 Being . . . pause Editors have struggled           ers her (on which account Dyce omitted it
   to make sense of this line in its original         as a ‘disgustingly vulgar’ addition ‘foisted
   location (after ‘hour’, l. 83) when Othello        into the text by the players’, and Furness
   is so evidently not ‘done’. But since it does      dismissed it as a tasteless ‘supererogatory
   not appear in Q, it is possible that it            horror’); or it may be meant as a moan,
   appeared as an addition in the margin of           coinciding with Emilia’s line, which
   the manuscript from which F derives (per-          prompts Othello’s ‘Not . . . quite dead’
   haps to replace Desdemona’s O Lord, Lord,          (l. 88); in which case his ‘What noise is
   Lord) and that whoever was responsible             this?’ can be played as a response either
   for the transcription misplaced it. The            to Emilia’s shouts or to Desdemona’s
   same suggestion has been made by Daniel            moaning. For a subtle analysis of the
   Amneus, The Three Othellos (Alhambra,              alternative possibilities, see Kerrigan,
   Calif., 1986), p. 6. For other examples of         p. 11.
   such transpositions, see Kellner, pp.           91 So, so Some Othellos, rather than smoth-
   152–3.                                             er Desdemona again, choose to stab her at
86 O . . . Lord Q’s exclamation may repre-            this point: a tradition that, according to
   sent Desdemona’s cries as Othello smoth-           Furness, apparently goes back to Garrick.

                                               378
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                   5.2

        jHe smothers her againk
emilia (within) What ho, my lord, my lord!
othello                                      Who’s there?
emilia (within)
  O good my lord, I’d speak a word with you.
othello
  Yes—’tis Emilia—(calling) by and by!—She’s dead.
  ’Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death:                                             95
  The noise was high. Ha! No more moving?
  Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were’t good?
  I think she stirs again—no. What’s best to do?
  If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife—
  My wife, my wife! What wife? I have no wife.                                              100
  O insupportable! O heavy hour!
  Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
  Of sun and moon, and that th’affrighted globe
  Should yawn at alteration.
91 He smothers her again] This edition (after delius); not in f, q within] f; q omits 92,
103 within] malone; f, q omit 92 I’d] q; I would f 93 Yes—’tis] sanders; yes: ’Tis f; yes,
tis q calling] oxford (after rowe) f, q omit Emilia—by and by!—She’s] rowe (subs.);
Aemilia: by and by. Shee’s f; Emillia, by and by: shee’s q 95 high] f; here q 97 again—
no. What’s] This edition; againe. No, what’s f; againe; no, what’s q        best to do] f;
the best q 99 What wife] f, q2; my wife q1 100 insupportable!] f; ~: q1; ~; q2; ~,
honigmann 103 Should] q; Did f

    It has no warrant in the text and contra-         heavy sorrowful; burdensome
    dicts Othello’s vow at l. 3. Furness devotes   101–3 huge . . . alteration As Theobald
    several pages to an inconclusive debate           recognized, Othello’s vision almost cer-
    between medical experts as to whether             tainly owes something to the portents
    Desdemona’s brief revival is technically          which follow Christ’s cruciﬁxion in the
    possible after smothering, or only if stab-       gospels: eclipse (Luke 23: 44–5) and
    bing were the real cause. But the ex-             earthquake (Matthew 27: 51–2), as well
    istence of an exactly similar episode in          as perhaps to the similar apocalyptic
    Webster’s Duchess of Malﬁ (4.3.343–9),            events of Revelation 6: 12–13. Hart cites a
    not to mention Roderigo’s reported                suggestive observation in Pliny, where
    revival (ll. 326–7), indicates that audi-         earthquakes are said to occur ‘when the
    ences were unlikely to be bothered about          Sun and Moon are eclipsed’ (2.80; sig.
    such niceties.                                    E1v).
                                                   102 affrighted globe This quibble on the
93 by and by soon, in a minute                        name of the theatre for which the play
94 like likely                                        was written creates an image of the audi-
95 high loud. Presumably referring to the             ence gaping in terror at the spectacle of
   noise of the brawl in which Cassio and             Desdemona’s murder. First recorded use
   Roderigo were stabbed, though it is some-          of ‘affrighted’ (OED).
   times taken to refer to the Desdemona’s         103 yawn gape; split open
   cries.                                             alteration At the unnatural change rep-
96 Still . . . grave Cf. Tilley D135, ‘As silent      resented by the eclipses; that is, by the
   as death’, and Dent D133.1, ‘As dumb               death of Desdemona, itself imaged as an
   (silent, still) as death (the grave)’.             eclipse (ll. 7–13).
100 insupportable unbearable

                                               379
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

emilia (within)                  I do beseech you
  That I may speak with you—O good my lord.
othello
  I had forgot thee—(Calling) O come in, Emilia!—                 105
  Soft—(calling) by and by!—let me the curtains draw.
         He closes the bed curtains
  (To Emilia) Where art thou?
         He unlocks the door. Enter Emilia
                                 What’s the matter with thee now?
emilia
  O, my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done.
othello What? Now?
emilia But now, my lord.                                          110
othello
  It is the very error of the moon:
  She comes more nearer earth than she was wont,
  And makes men mad.
emilia                      Cassio, my lord, hath killed
  A young Venetian called Roderigo.
othello
  Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed?                             115
emilia
  No, Cassio is not killed.
othello                      Not Cassio killed?
  Then murder’s out of tune, and sweet revenge
  Grows harsh.
desdemona O falsely, falsely murdered.
emilia O Lord! What cry is that?
othello                              That? What?

104 That] f; not in q           O] f; not in q 105 thee—O . . . Emilia!—] oxford; thee:
oh . . . Æmilia. f, q (Emillia) Calling] This edition (after oxford) 106 Soft—(calling) . . . by—
let] This edition; Soft, by and by, let f; Soft, by and by; let q 106.1 He . . . curtains] oxford;
not in f, q 107.1 He unlocks the door] theobald (subs.); not in f, q Enter Emilia] walker; after
‘now’ f; after ‘draw’ (l. 106) q 109 What? Now?] f, q2; What, now? q1 112 nearer] f;
neere the q 113 hath] f; has q 119 O Lord] q1; Alas f, q2


106.1–107 He . . . curtains . . . door The         111 error wandering, deviation from its
   extensive business in this scene, involving        proper orbit
   repeated openings and closings of the bed       113 mad The supposed power of the moon to
   curtains and (to a lesser extent) lockings         induce madness is embedded in the term
   and unlockings of the door, literalizes the        ‘lunatic’ (from Latin luna = moon).
   motif of discovery in a play obsessed with
   hidden iniquity and unbearable secrets.

                                              380
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    5.2

emilia
  Out and alas! That was my lady’s voice.                                                   120
       She opens the bed curtains
  Help, help, ho, help! O lady, speak again!
  Sweet Desdemona, O sweet mistress, speak!
desdemona
  A guiltless death I die.
emilia                    O, who hath done this deed?
desdemona
  Nobody—I myself. Farewell—
  Commend me to my kind lord—O, farewell!           She dies                                125
othello
  Why, how should she be murdered?
emilia                                  Alas, who knows?
othello
  You heard her say herself it was not I.
emilia
  She said so: I must needs report the truth.
othello
  She’s like a liar gone to burning hell:
  ’Twas I that killed her.                                                                  130
emilia
  O, the more angel she, and you the blacker devil!
othello
  She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
120 That was] f; it is q1; it was q2 120.1 She . . . curtains] walker (subs.) after booth in Fur-
ness (Emilia rushes to the bed and throws back the curtains); not in f, q 123 hath] f; has q 125
She dies] q; not in f 127 heard] q; heare f 128 the] f; a q

120 Out Exclamation of lament, often inten-          the question of Othello’s paradoxical
   sifying alas.                                     ‘kind’ or ‘nature’, as both Christian and
123 A . . . die Cf. Giraldi, App. C, p. 444.         Moor, may also be involved.
124 Nobody—I myself Desdemona’s excul-            126 Why . . . murdered Booth, moved by
   pation of Othello is, like Cordelia’s ‘No         Desdemona’s speech, delivered this line
   cause, no cause’ (Trag. Lear, 4.6.68), an         as ‘a half-choked utterance’, whilst
   act of self-abnegation, but one so extreme        Fechter spoke it with ‘steady effrontery’
   that—though fully in accord with the Vic-         (Furness).
   torian image of ‘the sweet, dear sufferer’     129–30 She’s . . . her Fechter’s Othello
   (Furness)—it can sound to modern ears             showed ‘a burst of triumph’ here, where
   painfully like self-cancellation, as though       Booth registered ‘deep emotion’ (Fur-
   I myself were simply another way of say-          ness).
   ing nobody.                                    131–3 O . . . a devil Cf. Tilley D297,
125 kind (a) lawful, rightful; (b) natural           ‘Though I am black, I am not the
   (behaving as a husband should); (c) lov-          devil’.
   ing; (d) kindly, generous, gentle (OED a.      132 folly wickedness; wantonness, un-
   3b, 1, 6, 5); as at 4.2.159–60, a play on         chastity (OED n.1 2–3)

                                              381
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

emilia
  Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
othello
  She was false as water.
emilia                    Thou art rash as ﬁre
  To say that she was false. O, she was heavenly true!                                       135
othello
  Cassio did tup her: ask thy husband else.
  O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell
  But that I did proceed upon just grounds
  To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
emilia
  My husband?
othello          Thy husband.
emilia                        That she was false to wedlock?                                 140
othello
  Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
  If heaven would make me such another world
  Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,

133 art] f, q2; as q1   136 tup] pope 1728; top f, q    141 Nay] q; not in f



133, 134 Thou Emilia’s use of the singular             apatite’ (OED). Shakespeare could have
   pronoun to Othello, who is both her                 learned about this stone in Pliny: ‘the
   immediate master and a representative of            Topaz or Chrysolith hath a singular green
   Venetian authority, is as deﬁant and                colour . . . for which it is esteemed very
   insulting as her more obvious gibes.                rich, and when it was ﬁrst found sur-
134 false as water Cf. Dent W86.1, ‘As                 passed all others in price’ (37.8, sig.
   unstable (false) as water’; false =                 Ggg3v). Lynda Boose has suggested, how-
   unfaithful.                                         ever, that the dramatist is more likely to
   rash as ﬁre Cf. Dent F246.1, ‘As hasty as           have known it from the Geneva version of
   ﬁre’.                                               the Song of Solomon, 5: 14. Her argu-
135 heavenly true Cf. Dent G173, ‘As false             ment that this text imagines a white stone
   as God is true’.                                    (consistent with the play’s emphasis on
136 tup Cf. 3.3.398. Othello once again ven-           Desdemona’s whiteness) is less than
   triloquizes Iago’s language.                        decisive, but it is certainly possible that
   else if you don’t believe me (idiomatic;            Shakespeare associated chrysolite with the
   OED adv. 4c)                                        purity of ‘crystal’; and the passage she
138 But that if it were not for the fact               cites from Francis Meres’s Palladis Tamia
   that                                                (1598), which asserts that a chrysolite
139 extremity extreme violence; utmost                 will crack when placed on the ﬁnger of an
   penalty; extreme rigour; the utmost point           adulteress, seems highly suggestive, and
   of severity or desperation (OED n. 4, 3b, 6,        may help to explain Othello’s emphasis on
   9).                                                 the ‘entire and perfect’ gem (‘Othello’s
143 chrysolite ‘A name formerly given to               “Chrysolite” and the Song of Songs
   several different gems of a green colour,           Tradition’, Philological Quarterly, 60
   such as zircon, tourmaline, topaz, and              (1981), 427–37).

                                              382
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                    5.2

  I’d not have sold her for it.
emilia                          My husband?
othello
  Ay, ’twas he that told me on her ﬁrst;                                                     145
  An honest man he is, and hates the slime
  That sticks on ﬁlthy deeds.
emilia                          My husband?
othello
  What needs this iterance, woman? I say, thy husband.
emilia
  O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love:
  My husband say that she was false?
othello                                 He, woman;                                           150
  I say thy husband—dost understand the word?—
  My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
emilia
  If he say so, may his pernicious soul
  Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th’ heart:
  She was too fond of her most ﬁlthy bargain.                                                155
othello Ha?
emilia Do thy worst:
  This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven,
  Than thou wast worthy her.
othello                          Peace, you were best.

145 on her] f; not in q 148 iterance, woman? I] f; iteration? woman, I q                  149–52
emilia . . . Iago] f, q2; not in q1 150 that] q2; not in f



144 sold . . . it Cf. Emilia’s ‘The world’s a         scene may tip over into comedy at this
   huge thing: it is a great price | For a small      point.
   vice’ (4.3.64–5). For all the splendour of      149 made mocks with made a mockery of.
   Othello’s ‘entire and perfect chrysolite’          Perhaps also suggesting ‘made a mocking
   there is something disturbing about the            counterfeit of’ (OED, mock, n. 3).
   commercial calculus of this speech.             154 lies . . . heart Cf. Dent T268, ‘To lie in
   Othello’s recollection of being himself            one’s throat’.
   ‘sold’ (1.3.138) may deepen the ironic          155 ﬁlthy bargain Emilia picks up both Oth-
   colouring.                                         ello’s commercial language (ll. 142–5)
146 slime moral pollution; semen or vaginal           and his contemptuous ﬁlthy (l. 147), but
   ﬂuid (OED n. 2a, and Williams,                     here associates it with the supposed ‘foul-
   Dictionary, pp. 1254–5).                           ness’ of his black skin (cf. ‘ignorant as
148 iterance iteration, repetition (ﬁrst              dirt’, l. 162). Ironically Iago will use the
   recorded use in OED).                              same language of her (‘Filth, thou liest’,
149–52 EMILIA . . . Iago A plausible cut              230).
   and most unlikely addition, since the           159 Peace . . . best be quiet, if you know
   danger of Emilia’s ‘iterance’ is that the          what’s good for you

                                               383
5.2                        Othello, the Moor of Venice

emilia
  Thou hast not half that power to do me harm                                         160
  As I have to be hurt. O gull, O dolt
  As ignorant as dirt, thou hast done a deed—
        Othello threatens her with his sword
  I care not for thy sword, I’ll make thee known,
  Though I lost twenty lives: help, help, ho, help!
  The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!                                   165
        Enter Montano, Gratiano, and Iago
montano
  What is the matter? How now, general?
emilia
  O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
  That men must lay their murders on your neck!
gratiano What is the matter?
emilia
  Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man:                                         170
  He says thou told’st him that his wife was false;
  I know thou didst not—thou’rt not such a villain.
  Speak, for my heart is full.
iago
  I told him what I thought; and told no more
  Than what he found himself was apt and true.                                         175
emilia
  But did you ever tell him she was false?
iago I did.
emilia
  You told a lie, an odious damnèd lie,
  Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie:
  She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?                                     180


160 that] f; the q 162.1 Othello . . . sword] honigmann (subs.); not in f, q 163 known] f;
know q 164 ho] f (hoa); O q 165.1 Enter . . . Iago] f; Enter Montano, Gratiano, Iago, and
others. q 168 murders] f (Murthers); murder q 169 gratiano] f, q2; All. q1



161 As . . . hurt as I have the capacity to      (neck because murder is a hanging
   endure pain                                   offence)
   gull dupe                                  173 heart is full i.e. bursting with emotion,
162 dirt excrement, ﬁlth (OED n. 1–2); cf.       about to break
   l. 155.                                    175 apt Cf. 2.1.278.
168 on your neck to your charge               177 I did metrically amphibious

                                          384
                             Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  5.2

iago
  With Cassio, mistress—go to, charm your tongue!
emilia
  I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak:
  My mistress here lies murdered in her bed.
montano, gratiano and iago O heavens forfend!
emilia
  And your reports have set the murder on.                                                185
othello
  Nay, stare not, masters, it is true indeed.
gratiano ’Tis a strange truth.
montano                          O monstrous act!
emilia
  Villainy, villainy, villainy! Now
  I think upon’t, I think I smelled a villainy—
  I thought so then. I’ll kill myself for grief.                                          190
  O villainy, villainy!
iago
  What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.
emilia
  Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
181 mistress—] after q (mistresse;); Mistris? f 183–91 My . . . O, villainy, villainy] f, q2;
not in q1 184 montano . . . iago] This edition; All. f, q2 185 murder] f; murderer q2
188 Now] This edition; not in f, q2 189 I think I smelled a villainy] This edition; I thinke: I
smel’t: O Villany f; I think, I smell a villany q2
181 charm your tongue be silent. A com-          188–9 Now . . . smelled Since the F word-
   mon idiomatic expression (OED, tongue,           ing of these lines has no independent con-
   n. 4), but here resonating with the play’s       ﬁrmation in Q, it seems quite possible that
   recurrent language of magic.                     some errors may have crept in at this
182 bound duty bound                                point, resulting from difﬁculties in deci-
183–91 My . . . villainy, villainy Since they       phering the copy text. The Q2 editor
   add little of substance to the exchange,         clearly thought so, but his attempt at
   these lines are more likely to represent a       emendation is not particularly satisfac-
   cut from Q than revision of F; but the evi-      tory either. Because Emilia appears to be
   dent confusion in ll. 189–90 could suggest       recalling her earlier suspicions of Iago’s
   a hastily written and less than legible          part in Othello’s jealousy (3.3.317–20,
   addition to the F copy.                          4.2.130–3–6), F’s smell’t is probably a
187 strange truth Cf. Dent S914, ‘It is (no)        misreading of smelt (easy, since apostro-
   more strange than true’. The phrase had          phes were very inconsistently used in
   a sharper, more oxymoronic ring than             this period); while (as the Q2 editor
   modern clichés might suggest, since truth        recognized) F’s O could easily result from
   was proverbially ‘plain’, ‘innocent’,            a confusion of a with lower case o. In F
   ‘naked’ and essentially familiar or ‘natur-      line 188 is one syllable short, which may
   al’, whilst strange referred to the alien,       indicate a missing word; and now most
   unnatural, and uncanny. The connota-             readily completes the sense. It may, how-
   tions of Gratiano’s strange, in fact,            ever, be that the speech was meant to
   closely resemble those of Montano’s              sound incoherent.
   ‘monstrous’.

                                             385
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  ’Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
  Perchance, Iago, I will ne’er go home.                                                      195
othello
  O, O, O!
        He falls on the bed
emilia Nay, lay thee down and roar,
  For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent
  That e’er did lift up eye.
othello jrisingk             O, she was foul!
  I scarce did know you, uncle: there lies your niece,
  Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped:                                       200
  I know this act shows horrible and grim.
gratiano
  Poor Desdemon, I am glad thy father’s dead:
  Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
  Shore his old thread in twain; did he live now,
  This sight would make him do a desperate turn,                                              205
  Yea, curse his better angel from his side

196 He . . . bed] q (Oth. fals on the bed.); not in f 198 rising] theobald (subs.); not in f, q 201
horrible] f; terrible q 202 Desdemon] f; Desdemona q 204 in twain] f (in twaine), q2;
atwane q1

194 proper I obey In the marriage liturgy             modestly down’ (Honigmann); it may be,
   wives promised to obey their husbands, a           however, that nothing more than an atti-
   doctrine widely reiterated in homilies, ser-       tude of decorous submission, literally
   mons, and treatises on household govern-           ‘looking up to’ her husband, is implied.
   ment; but in Othello, as in his next major      199 uncle Cf. l. 253. Evidently Gratiano is
   tragedy, King Lear, Shakespeare is inter-          the ‘brother’ referred to by Brabantio at
   ested in testing the limits of obedience           1.1.174 (hence his inheritance of the
   and service. Emilia’s deﬁance of both hus-         estate at 5.2.364–6). Honigmann notes
   band and master parallels Desdemona’s              how Othello’s insistence on the family
   deﬁance of her father in 1.3, and also             relationship pathetically emphasizes his
   looks forward to the servant’s deﬁance of          sense of isolated alienation (p. 23).
   Cornwall over the blinding of Gloucester        204 Shore . . . thread Classical mythology
   (Trag. Lear, 3.7.70–3).                            imaged human life as a thread, spun,
195 ne’er go home Since the household is              measured, and cut by the three Fates
   imagined as a locus of masculine author-           successively charged with these tasks:
   ity and a carefully hierarchized ‘little           Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos.
   commonwealth’, Emilia’s refusal to go           205 do . . . turn commit an act of despair.
   home amounts to an absolute repudiation            Despair, itself a mortal sin, frequently
   of her social ‘place’: an insurrectionary          issued in suicide, for which orthodox
   gesture that resonates ironically with             Christian doctrine offered no forgiveness.
   Iago’s rebellious resentments over his          206 better . . . side Cf. Sonnet 144 where
   subordinate ‘place’ at the beginning of            despair ‘Tempteth my better angel from
   the play.                                          my side’. Gratiano imagines his brother as
198 lift up eye ‘i.e. to heaven in purity of          the protagonist of a morality play like Dr
   spirit and prayer’ (Sanders); ‘perhaps             Faustus, where Good and Bad Angels
   implying that she usually kept her eyes            compete for Faustus’s soul.

                                              386
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                     5.2

  And fall to reprobance.
othello
  ’Tis pitiful; but yet Iago knows
  That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
  A thousand times committed—Cassio confessed it,                                             210
  And she did gratify his amorous works
  With that recognizance and pledge of love
  Which I ﬁrst gave her: I saw it in his hand,
  It was a handkerchief, an antique token
  My father gave my mother.                                                                   215
emilia O God, O heavenly God!
iago ’Swounds, hold your peace.
emilia ’Twill out, ’twill out! I peace?
  No, I will speak as liberal as the north;
  Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,                                                220
  All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.
iago
  Be wise, and get you home.

207 reprobance] f; reprobation q 212 that] f, q2; the q1 216 O . . . heavenly God]
q1; Oh Heauen! oh heauenly Powres! f, q2 217 ’Swounds] q1 (Zouns); Come f, q2
218–19 ’twill out . . . speak] f; ’twill: I hold my peace sir, no, | I’le be in speaking q1; ’twill
out: I hold my peace sir, no, | Ile be in speaking q2 219 north] f, q2; ayre q1


207 reprobance reprobation (a coinage,                transformation of the handkerchief from
   OED; cf. iterance, l. 148). A sinner in a          a badge of maternal power to an emblem
   reprobate condition was cast off from God          of paternal authority. But the inconsis-
   and condemned to damnation.                        tency may be a simple oversight, or per-
208 pitiful According to Aristotle’s Poetics,         haps even result from an inadvertent
   pity and terror were the emotions that             transposition of father and mother in the
   tragedy ought to arouse in its audience.           copy from which both F and Q seem ulti-
210 A thousand times An obvious hyper-                mately to derive (cf. 2.3.168, 207, 4.2.55).
   bole, but an important detail for those         217 ’Swounds . . . peace             Metrically
   who believe in the ‘double time scheme’            amphibious.
   (see Introduction, p. 34).                      218 ’Twill out the truth must come out.
211 gratify reward                                    ‘But is there a hint that Emilia has bottled
   works doings; perhaps also with the                up a guilty secret . . . which now bursts
   sarcastic sense of ‘masterpieces’ (OED             forth?’ (Honigmann).
   n. 1, 14).                                      219 as . . . north as freely as the north
212 recognizance token, badge                         wind (blows); one of numerous Shake-
215 father . . . mother Contradicts 3.4.54–           spearian variations on a common
   64. Some critics argue that the inconsis-          proverb, ‘As free as the air’ (Dent A88): cf.
   tency indicates that the earlier account           e.g. Henry V, 1.1.49, ‘The air, a chartered
   was concocted in order to frighten Desde-          libertine’; Troilus, 1.3.250, ‘Speak frankly
   mona, or to conceal the real reason for            as the wind’. Because of its closeness
   the passion stirred up by the loss of this         to the standard formulation, Q’s ‘liberal
   seemingly trivial item. Others offer a             as the air’ may represent memorial
   psychoanalytic reading of the apparent             corruption.

                                              387
5.2                         Othello, the Moor of Venice

emilia
  I will not.
        Iago threatens Emilia with his sword
gratiano Fie, your sword upon a woman?
emilia
  O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak’st of
  I found by fortune, and did give my husband:                                           225
  For often, with a solemn earnestness—
  More than indeed belonged to such a triﬂe—
  He begged of me to steal’t.
iago                            Villainous whore!
emilia
  She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
  And I did give’t my husband.
iago                               Filth, thou liest!                                    230
emilia
  By heaven I do not; I do not, gentlemen:
  O murderous coxcomb, what should such a fool
  Do with so good a wife?
        Othello runs at Iago, but is disarmed by Montano; Iago
        kills his wife
othello                     Are there no stones in heaven
  But what serves for the thunder? Precious villain!
gratiano
  The woman falls: sure he hath killed his wife.                                         235

223 Iago . . . sword] after rowe (Jago offers to stab his wife.); not in f, q 224 of] f; on q
225 give] f; gaue q 233 wife] f; woman q Othello . . . wife] after q (The Moore runnes at
Iago. Iago kils his wife.), dyce 1864 (but is disarmed by Mont.); not in f 234 Precious] f, q1
(pretious); pernitious q2 235 hath] f; has q

224 dull Moor A complicated quibble              232 murderous coxcomb A coxcomb was
   depending on the resemblances and (sup-          the cap, resembling a rooster’s comb,
   posed) etymological links between Med.           worn by jesters; hence a metonymy for
   Latin Morus = ‘Moor’, Latin morus (from          fool. By thus acknowledging the element
   Greek mwróV) = ‘dull, stupid’, and Latin         of brutal farce in its plotting, the play
   morus = blackberry or black mulberry.            seeks to pre-empt and disarm neoclassical
   Greek moros (móroV) = ‘fate, doom, death’        criticisms of cuckoldry as an indecorous
   may also be part of this tightly enfolded        subject for tragedy.
   word-play. See also 2.1.221, and cf.          232–3 what . . . Do what has he done to
   4.3.37.                                          deserve
228 whore Iago, like Othello, bewhores his          fool Cf. 2.1.134–5.
   wife before killing her.                      233 stones thunderbolts
230 Filth Cf. l. 155.                            234 Precious out-and-out (a sarcastic
232–3 O . . . wife Presumably directed at           intensiﬁer)
   Othello, though it would be possible for
   Emilia to play it as aimed at Iago.

                                            388
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                  5.2

emilia
  Ay, ay. O, lay me by my mistress’ side.              Exit Iago
gratiano
  He’s gone, but his wife’s killed.
montano
  ’Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon
  Which I have here recovered from the Moor;
  Come guard the door without, let him not pass,                                           240
  But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain,
  For ’tis a damnèd slave.
                                   Exeunt Montano and Gratiano
othello                      I am not valiant neither:
  But every puny whipster gets my sword.
  But why should Honour outlive Honesty?
  Let it go all.
emilia          What did thy song bode, lady?                                              245
  Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,
  And die in music: (sings) ‘willow, willow, willow’.
  Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor—
  So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true!
  So speaking as I think, alas, I die.                                                     250
        She dies jand falls on the bedk

236 Exit Iago] q; not in f 238 you this] f; your q 239 here] q; not in f 242 Exe-
unt . . . Gratiano] q (Exit Mont. and Gratiano.); Exit. f 245–7 What . . . willow] f, q2; not in
q1 247 sings] dyce (subs.); not in f, q 250 alas] f; I die q 250.1 She dies] q; not in f and
falls on the bed] This edition; not in f, q


238 notorious conspicuous, obvious (OED              passage would logically have been cut
   n. 3, 1608)                                       from Q following the removal of the Wil-
   you this Q your may reﬂect a piece of             low Song in 4.3.
   stage business in which Othello snatched       246–7 swan . . . music Cf. Dent S1028,
   Gratiano’s sword in his effort to kill Iago,      ‘Like a swan he sings before his death’.
   though ll. 242–4 would seem to make this       250 So . . . die Cf. Dent S725, ‘To speak as
   inappropriate.                                    one thinks’.
243 puny inferior, subordinate; raw, inex-        250.1 falls . . . bed Emilia’s request to ‘lay
   perienced; feeble, undersized (OED a. 1,          me by my mistress’ side’ (l. 236) seems to
   3, 4)                                             constitute an implicit stage direction
   whipster insigniﬁcant or contemptible             (though it is not clear exactly how and
   person (OED n. 1c; earliest recorded use)         when her body should be placed on the
244 But . . . Honesty Usually glossed ‘why           bed); this direction was invariably
   should reputation outlive integrity?’ But         ignored in the 18th- and 19th-century
   if Othello is already contemplating sui-          theatre (Pechter, p. 149), but has
   cide, he may be casting himself as the            been honoured in some more recent
   allegorical ﬁgure of Honour and his               productions, including the Olivier ver-
   wronged wife as Honesty.                          sion, where Gratiano helped Emilia on to
245–7 What . . . willow Cf. 4.3.24–9. This           the bed.

                                              389
5.2                          Othello, the Moor of Venice

othello
  I have another weapon in this chamber,
  It was a sword of Spain, the ice-brook’s temper—
  O, here it is: uncle, I must come forth.
gratiano (within)
  If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear:
  Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.                                           255
othello
  Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
  Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
       Enter Gratiano
gratiano
  What is the matter?
othello                  Behold, I have a weapon—
  A better never did itself sustain
  Upon a soldier’s thigh: I have seen the day                                              260
  That with this little arm and this good sword
  I have made my way through more impediments
  Than twenty times your stop. But O vain boast!
  Who can control his fate? ’Tis not so now.
  Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed:                                            265
  Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt
  And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
252 was] f; is q ice-brook’s] f (Ice brookes); Isebrookes q 254 within] q (Gra. within), after
‘forth’ (l. 255); not in f 256 with] f; to q 257.1 Enter Gratiano] theobald; not in f, q 263
your] f, q2; you q1 265–71 Be . . . wench] f, q2; not in q1

252 sword of Spain The quality of Spanish        265–71 Be . . . wench It is difﬁcult to
   blades (especially those from Toledo and         account for these lines as a deliberate cut
   Bilbao) was legendary; Spanish weapon-           from Q, let alone as an addition to F, since
   makers had perfected their craft, ironic-        the Q text does not really make sense as it
   ally enough, in the course of the long           stands. An exceptionally careless omis-
   struggle to expel the Moors from Spain.          sion (perhaps connected with the repeat-
   ice-brook’s temper ‘Steel is hardened            ed ‘now’ in ll. 264 and 271) seems to be
   [tempered] by being put red-hot into very        involved; or perhaps (as Ridley conjec-
   cold water’ (Johnson). OED, temper, v.           tured) a cut was confusingly marked, and
   14a cites Palsgrave (1530): ‘They have a         was meant to begin and end one line
   great advantage in Spain to temper their         earlier.
   blades well because of the nature of their    265 Be not afraid Cf. John 6: 20: ‘But
   rivers.’                                         [Jesus] said unto them, It is I: be not
257 naked unarmed, unprotected (OED n.              afraid.’
   4)                                            266 butt terminal point, goal; mark for
260 I . . . day Proverbial phrase: Dent             shooting, target (OED n.4 1, 2a)
   D81.1.                                        267 sea-mark object serving to guide sailors
263 your stop your efforts to impede me             at sea, beacon; boundary or limit of the
264 Who . . . fate Cf. Dent F83, ‘It is impos-      sea’s ﬂow
   sible to avoid fate’.                            utmost sail furthest point of my voyage

                                             390
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                     5.2

   Do you go back dismayed? ’Tis a lost fear:
   Man but a rush against Othello’s breast,
   And he retires. Where should Othello go?                                                 270
        He goes to the bed
   Now: how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench,
   Pale as thy smock, when we shall meet at count,
   This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
   And ﬁends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl?
   Even like thy chastity. O cursèd, cursèd slave!                                          275
   Whip me, ye devils,
   From the possession of this heavenly sight,
   Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulphur,
   Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid ﬁre—


270 And] f; The q2 270.1 He . . . bed] walker (subs.); not in f, q 271 Now: how] f; How
q2 272 count] q (count), f (compt) 274 girl?] f; girl, q 275 cursèd, cursèd] f; cursed q
276 ye] f; you q




268 dismayed stripped of your courage;             cursèd slave Othello probably curses
   defeated                                        himself (in which case slave will recall his
   lost wasted, groundless                         being ‘sold to slavery’, 1.3.138), but (as
269 Man . . . rush use a mere reed                 Edwin Booth, for example, assumed) the
271 ill-starred ill-fated, governed by an          words could also be aimed at Iago,
   unlucky star (ﬁrst recorded use in OED)         denounced as a slave by Montano at l.
272 Pale . . . smock Cf. Dent C446, ‘As            242; in either case the word further
   pale as a clout [piece of cloth or              emphasizes the ironic parallels between
   clothing]’.                                     the two.
   count accounting (i.e. the Day of Judge-     276 Whip . . . devils The half-line suggests
   ment, when souls are weighed and the            a signiﬁcant pause after an emotional
   damned consigned to hell, a common              breakdown in the previous line; but some
   motif in the painting and sculpture of          editors prefer to re-align, taking the pause
   medieval churches and cathedrals). F’s          after ‘chastity’, as Othello absorbs the full
   compt was a common variant spelling. In         impact of her cold ﬂesh.
   1563, Shakespeare’s father John author-      277 possession . . . sight Othello feels that
   ized the over-painting of the chancel           in his damnable state he no longer
   arch ‘Doom’ in the Guild Chapel, Strat-         deserves to possess the ‘heavenly’ Desde-
   ford (near New Place, the house Shake-          mona; but, in a play where sight is so
   speare bought in 1597); see Wells, All          painfully obsessive, the phrase can also
   Time, p. 25.                                    suggest that he is possessed by the sight of
274–5 Cold . . . chastity Cf. Dent I1, ‘As         her, as if by an evil spirit; even here, then,
   chaste as ice (snow)’.                          ‘possession’ and ‘heavenly’ continue to
274 Cold . . . girl An implied stage               register the angel/devil split in Othello’s
   direction: Othello presumably feels             response to Desdemona.
   Desdemona’s hand or face.                    278–9 sulphur . . . liquid ﬁre Sulphur
275 Even . . . slave This line can be scanned      (brimstone) and a lake of ﬁre ﬁgure in
   either as a pentameter or as a hexameter,       Revelation’s description of the torments
   depending on whether cursed is treated as       of hell (20: 10, 14).
   monosyllabic or disyllabic (as here).        279 steep-down precipitous

                                            391
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

  O Desdemon! Dead Desdemona! Dead! O, O!                                                      280
       Enter Lodovico, Montano, Iago with ofﬁcers guarding
       him, and Cassio in a chair
lodovico
  Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
othello
  That’s he that was Othello: here I am.
lodovico
  Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
othello
  I look down towards his feet—but that’s a fable:
  If that thou be’st a devil, I cannot kill thee.                                              285
       He wounds Iago
lodovico
  Wrench his sword from him.
iago                              I bleed, sir, but not killed.
othello
  I am not sorry neither: I’d have thee live,
  For in my sense ’tis happiness to die.
lodovico
  O thou, Othello, that was once so good,
280 O Desdemon . . . O!] This edition after f (Oh Desdemon! dead Desdemon: dead. Oh, oh!);
O Desdemona, Desdemona, dead, O, o, o. q1; O Desdemona, Desdemona; dead, O. o, o. q2
280.1–2 Enter . . . chair] after q (Enter Lodouico, Montano, Iago, and Ofﬁcers | Cassio in a
Chaire.), rowe (. . . Iago prisoner, with Ofﬁcers.); Enter Lodouico, Cassio, Montano, and Iago, with
Ofﬁcers. f 281 unfortunate] f; infortunate q 283 that] f, q2; this q1 285.1 He wounds
Iago] rowe (subs.); not in f, q 286 Wrench] f, q2; Wring q1 287 live] f, q (corr.); loue q
(uncorr.) 289 was] f; wert q

280.1–2 Enter . . . chair At this point             284 I . . . fable The devil supposedly had
   Booth’s Othello drew the bed-curtains in            cloven feet (Tilley D252); there may be an
   order ‘that Desdemona’s corpse [might]              echo of Faustus’s ‘I think hell’s a fable’
   not be polluted by Iago’s gaze’ (Furness).          (Dr Faustus, 2.1.516).
282 That’s . . . am Othello’s renunciation          288 sense opinion (OED n. 18)
   of his name acknowledges the effective              happiness to die Booth noted the echo
   cancellation of his Venetian identity. His          of 2.1.184–5 (‘If it were now to die, |
   name is used only twice by other charac-            ’Twere now to be most happy’): ‘The
   ters in this last scene: once by a confused         same sad refrain ﬁrst heard in the very
   Desdemona as she awakes (‘Who’s there?              heaven of his happiness. Let it be faintly
   Othello?’, l. 23), and once by a regretful          heard wherever possible through your
   Lodovico (‘thou, Othello, that was once so          performance of this character’ (Furness).
   good’, l. 289); otherwise he has reverted        289 O . . . Othello Lodovico’s exclamation
   to the anonymity of ‘the Moor’ (cf. l. 365).        seems to draw a kind of punning atten-
   With Othello’s disintegrating sense of              tion to the repeated ‘o’ in the Moor’s
   identity compare Iago’s ‘I am not what I            name. For a discussion of the signiﬁcance
   am’, and Antony’s self-dissolution: ‘Here           of the play’s repeated ‘O’s, see Joel Fine-
   I am Antony, | Yet cannot hold this                 man, ‘The Sound of “O” in Othello: The
   visible shape’ (Antony, 4.15.13–14).                Real of the Tragedy of Desire’, in

                                               392
                            Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 5.2

  Fallen in the practice of a damnèd slave,                                             290
  What shall be said to thee?
othello                        Why anything—
  An honourable murderer, if you will,
  For naught I did in hate, but all in honour.
lodovico
  This wretch hath part confessed his villainy:
  Did you and he consent in Cassio’s death?                                             295
othello Ay.
cassio
  Dear general, I never gave you cause.
othello
  I do believe it, and I ask your pardon:
  Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
  Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?                                           300
iago
  Demand me nothing: what you know, you know;
  From this time forth I never will speak word.
lodovico What, not to pray?
gratiano Torments will ope your lips.
othello Well, thou dost best.                                                           305

290 damnèd] q (damned); cursed f 291 shall] f; should q 293 I did] f; did I q            297
never gave] f; did never giue q 298 your] f; you q 299 I] f, q2; not in q1

   Anthony Gerard Barthelemy (ed.), Critical      play) is latent in the very idea of a ‘Moor
   Essays on Shakespeare’s ‘Othello’ (New         of Venice’.
   York, 1994), pp. 104–23, and Daniel J.      295 consent in agree in planning
   Vitkus, ‘The “O” in Othello: Tropes of      299–300 Will . . . body Cf. Giraldi, App. C,
   Damnation and Nothingness’, in Kolin,          p. 446: ‘It appeared astonishing to every-
   pp. 347–62. For Vitkus, Othello’s name         body that a human heart could harbour
   ‘beginning and ending in “O”, becomes a        such malice.’
   cipher signifying nothing’ (p. 360).        300 ensnared Cf. 1 Timothy 3: 7; 2 Timothy
                                                  2: 26: ‘the snare of the devil’.
289–91 thou . . . thee Lodovico’s use of       301 what . . . know Cf. Tilley K178, ‘I know
   these singular pronouns is probably con-       what I know’.
   descending and aggressive; but either or    302 From . . . word Honigmann compares
   both could also be played as markers of        Iago’s refusal to speak with the similar
   regretful intimacy.                            deﬁance of Aaron the Moor in Titus
290 Fallen . . . practice victim to the           (5.1.58), and of Hieronimo in Kyd’s
   treacherous plotting                           Spanish Tragedy (4.4.182) who bites out
   damnèd F’s cursed is probably a result of      his tongue rather than submit to his
   contamination from l. 275, but may be          accusers’ interrogation.
   a deliberate alteration by whoever was      304 Torments . . . lips Metrically amphibi-
   responsible for purging and softening the      ous.
   oaths in F.                                 305 Well . . . best Might be addressed to
292 honourable murderer Another ver-              Lodovico or (in sarcastic approbation) to
   sion of the ‘civil monster’ oxymoron           Iago.
   (4.1.60), which (on one reading of the

                                           393
5.2                            Othello, the Moor of Venice

lodovico
  Sir, you shall understand what hath befallen,
  Which, as I think, you know not: here is a letter
  Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
  And here another—the one of them imports
  The death of Cassio, to be undertook                                                       310
  By Roderigo.
othello
  O villain!
cassio      Most heathenish and most gross!
lodovico
  Now here’s another discontented paper
  Found in his pocket too; and this it seems
  Roderigo meant t’have sent this damnèd villain,                                            315
  But that, belike, Iago in the nick
  Came in and satisﬁed him.
othello                       O thou pernicious caitiff!
  How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
  That was my wife’s?
cassio                  I found it in my chamber;
  And he himself confessed it but e’en now                                                   320
  That there he dropped it for a special purpose
  Which wrought to his desire.
othello                           O fool, fool, fool!

310 undertook | By] f, q2; vndertooke—by q1 316 nick] q1; interim f, q2 317 thou] f;
the q 318 that] f; a q 320 it but e’en] f (euen), q2; it euen q1; but even capell


306–28 Sir . . . set him on Like the                316 in the nick at the critical moment
   Friar’s speech at the end of Romeo, this            (Dent N160). As Honigmann suggests, F’s
   extended piece of retrospective explana-            interim seems likely to be a sophistication
   tion can easily seem very clumsy in                 by someone who thought the vivid collo-
   performance, not least because of the               quial phrase inappropriate to the digniﬁed
   over-elaborate use of the revelatory let-           emissary of Venice.
   ters. In so far as the latter belong to a pre-   317 satisﬁed him gave him a satisfactory
   dominantly comic convention, the effect             explanation
   is to emphasize the ironies of Othello’s            caitiff wretch
   deception by underlining the grossly             320 it but e’en The F reading is satisfactory
   theatrical and mechanical nature of                 if even is meant to be contracted in this
   Iago’s plotting.                                    way; otherwise Malone may have been
312 heathenish barbarous, abominable                   right in supposing that it was erroneously
   (OED a. 3a–b)                                       imported from the following line.
   gross monstrous, ﬂagrant, obvious (OED           322 wrought to his desire produced the
   a. 3, 4)                                            effect he wanted
313 discontented full of resentment                    fool Cf. 2.1.134–5.

                                                394
                              Othello, the Moor of Venice                                 5.2

cassio
  There is besides in Roderigo’s letter
  How he upbraids Iago that he made him
  Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came                                                 325
  That I was cast; and even but now he spake—
  After long seeming dead—Iago hurt him,
  Iago set him on.
lodovico (to Othello)
  You must forsake this room and go with us:
  Your power and your command is taken off,                                               330
  And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
  If there be any cunning cruelty
  That can torment him much and hold him long,
  It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest
  Till that the nature of your fault be known                                              335
  To the Venetian state. Come, bring away!
othello
  Soft you, a word or two before you go:
  I have done the state some service, and they know’t—
  No more of that. I pray you in your letters,
  When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,                                              340
  Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
  Nor set down aught in malice: then must you speak
  Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
  Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
  Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,                                             345

336 bring away] f; bring him away q       337 before you go] f, q2; not in q1   341 me as I am]
f, q2; them as they are q1

325 Brave insult, defy                               (Lewkenor, p. 18; italics added). In its
   upon during                                       concern for the rewards of service, the
325–6 whereon . . . cast as I result of              last big speech of the play returns to
   which it came about that I was                    the theme of Iago’s opening diatribe
   cashiered                                         (1.1.10–60).
333 hold him keep him alive (for prolonged        340 unlucky unfortunate, resulting from
   suffering)                                        unhappy chance
334 close closely guarded                         343 loved not wisely ‘So Ovid, Heroides,
337 Soft you wait a minute                           2.27 “non sapienter amavi” (I loved not
338 state . . . service Perhaps recalling            wisely)’ (Honigmann).
   Contarini’s remarks about the adoption         344 wrought fashioned (by someone else);
   of ‘foreign men and strangers’ into the           worked up, agitated. Used esp. of the sea,
   ranks of Venetian citizens ‘either in             OED p. ppl. 5; cf. Knolles, p. 368, ‘The
   regard of their great nobility, or that they      billows of a wrought sea’.
   had been dutiful towards the state, or else    345 Perplexed bewildered, distracted;
   had done unto them some notable service’          tormented

                                              395
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

   Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
   Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,
   Albeit unusèd to the melting mood,
   Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees
   Their medicinable gum. Set you down this;                                                350
   And say besides that in Aleppo once,
   Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk
   Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
   I took by th’ throat the circumcisèd dog
   And smote him—thus.
        He stabs himself                                                                    355



346 Indian] q, f2; Iudean f1 349 Drops] f, q1; drop q2 350 medicinable] f; medicinall q
352 malignant and] q (Malignant and); malignant, and f 355.1 He . . . himself] q; not in f



346 base dark-coloured; lowly, vile; degrad-         important centre of the Venetian-
   ed, unworthy (OED a. 5, 6, 10)                    dominated trade with the Orient.
   Indian A much debated crux. See App.           352 malignant Either an adjective meaning
   F(iii) for discussion of the textual              ‘malevolent’, or more probably (as the
   arguments.                                        F punctuation and Q’s capitalization
346–7 pearl . . . Richer An ironic echo              and italics suggest) a noun meaning
   of the sarcastic ‘jewel’ with which               ‘one who is ill-disposed towards true
   Brabantio        dismissed      Desdemona         religion’.
   (1.3.194); and cf. also Cassio’s ‘The riches   352–4 turbaned . . . circumcisèd Ritual
   of the ship is come on shore’ (2.1.83).           signs of Islamic allegiance; apparently
   In the Marian tradition, the Virgin is            echoing the ‘circumcised turbaned Turks’
   associated with Matthew’s ‘pearl of great         of James I’s Lepanto (l. 11); see Emrys
   price’.                                           Jones, ‘Othello, Lepanto, and the Cyprus
348 melting being overwhelmed with grief;            Wars’, SS 21 (1968), 47–52. Vitkus sees
   dissolving into tears. In the context of          this as the moment that symbolically
   Othello’s eroticized suicide, the common          conﬁrms Othello’s damnation as a rene-
   sense of sexual dissolution or ecstasy may        gade, a ‘baptized Moor turned Turk . . .
   also be present (see Williams, Dictionary,        [who] becomes the enemy within’
   pp. 872–3).                                       (‘ “Turning Turk” ’, p. 176).
349–50 Drops . . . gum Shakespeare seems          355 smote him Hart cites Sir Antony Sher-
   to be remembering Pliny’s account of the          ley’s Travels (1599; ed. 1825, p. 32): ‘they
   medicinal resins produced by certain Ara-         have a law in Turkey, that if a Christian
   bian species, including myrrh trees which         do strike a Turk, he must either turn Turk
   ‘sweat out of themselves a certain liquor         or lose his right arm’. Many 19th-century
   called stact, which is very good myrrh’           Othellos, from Kean (1831) to Irving
   (12.15, sig. Ii4v), and goes on to describe       (1881), used this as the curtain line. As
   opobalsamum (probably from the true               many critics have recognized, Othello’s
   Balm of Gilead), which ‘issueth out of the        suicidal re-enactment of this killing per-
   wound . . . which cometh forth by small           fectly embodies the contradictions of his
   drops; and as it thus weepeth, the tears          position as both Moor and Venetian Chris-
   ought to be received in wool’ (12.25, sig.        tian. David Harewood (National, 1997)
   Kk3). One type of so-called ‘mummy’ was           stabbed himself with a blade hidden in
   obtained in this fashion.                         the cross he wore (see Introduction, p. 86
350 medicinable (‘med’cinable’) medicinal            n. 1).
351 Aleppo A city in Turkey known as an

                                              396
                               Othello, the Moor of Venice                                       5.2

lodovico
  O bloody period!
gratiano            All that’s spoke is marred.
othello
  I kissed thee ere I killed thee—no way but this:
  Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
        He kisses Desdemona, falls on the bed and dies
cassio
  This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
  For he was great of heart.
lodovico                       O Spartan dog,                                                    360
  More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,
  Look on the tragic loading of this bed:
  This is thy work. The object poisons sight—
358.1 He . . . dies] after walker (falls on the bed, and dies), oxford (He kisses Desdemona and dies);
Dyes f; He dies. q 362 loading] f; lodging q

356 period termination; issue, outcome;                 magnanimous. Balz Engler, however, has
   death; appointed end, goal (OED n. 5a, b,            argued (citing e.g. 5.2.173) that Cassio
   d; 8, 9). Gratiano’s ‘All that’s spoke . . .’        means only that Othello’s heart was
   also suggests a quibble on the rhetorical            swollen with grief to the point of bursting
   and grammatical meanings: a periodic                 (‘Othello’s Great Heart’, English Studies,
   (or syntactically complex) sentence, and             68 (1987), 129–36).
   the pause or full stop that marks the end            Spartan dog A kind of bloodhound (cf.
   of a sentence (10a, 11a–b).                          Dream, 4.1.112–13, 118–19). But in the
357–8 I . . . kiss A popular curtain speech             context of ‘circumcisèd dog’ (l. 354), and
   from the mid 18th century (John Palmer,              in the light of the fact that Roderigo calls
   1766) to the Edwardian productions of                Iago ‘inhuman dog’ (5.1.62), a sarcastic
   Frank Benson (1900) and Oscar Ashe                   quibble on his display of ‘Spartan’
   (1907), and used as late as Robert Atkins’s          courage is probably involved.
   1945 production at Stratford-upon-Avon,           361 fell savage, cruel, ruthless; cunning
   this provided the inspiration for Verdi’s            (OED a. 1, 5)
   ending, with its harrowing repetition of          362 tragic loading Although one or the
   Othello’s earlier cry, Un bacio, ancora un           other is likely to result from compositorial
   bacio (‘A kiss, one more kiss’). Victorian           (or scribal) misreading, both the F and
   productions frequently added an expiring             Q readings seem attractive here: tragic
   sigh of ‘O, Desdemona!’ at the end of the            suggests a subdued word-play on the
   speech; by contrast, Patrick Stewart, in an          metaphorical sense of load (‘weigh down,
   extraordinary touch, punctuated it with a            burden, oppress’; OED v. 6a); but lodging
   laugh before ‘no way but this’, suggesting           would also involve a quibble on the spe-
   both ironic self-recognition and wry tri-            cialized sense of lodge favoured by Ridley
   umph over Iago.                                      (‘throw on the ground, lay ﬂat . . . beat
358 die . . . kiss Those who favour Iudean at           down crops’, OED v. 5), a ‘countryman’s
   l. 346 read this as a Judas-kiss; but like the       word’ and authentically Shakespearian
   last kisses of Romeo (‘Thus with a kiss I            (cf. Contention (2 Henry VI), 3.2.176;
   die’), Juliet, and Antony (Romeo, 5.3.120,           Richard II, 3.3.161; Macbeth, 4.1.71).
   164–7; Antony, 4.16.20–2, 39–41),                 363–4.1 The object . . . bed-curtains The
   Othello’s is an erotic mors osculi that              Dexter/Olivier ﬁlm (like some critics)
   transforms literal dying into the ‘death’ of         interpreted ‘object’ as referring contemp-
   sexual consummation.                                 tuously to Iago as a mere ‘thing’; but it is
360 great of heart proud, high-spirited;                difﬁcult to parallel such a usage in the

                                                397
5.2                           Othello, the Moor of Venice

   Let it be hid.
         jThey close the bed-curtainsk
                 Gratiano, keep the house                                                        365
   And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
   For they succeed on you; (to Cassio) to you, lord
         governor,
   Remains the censure of this hellish villain—
   The time, the place, the torture, O enforce it;
   Myself will straight aboard, and to the state                                                 370
   This heavy act with heavy heart relate.                                       Exeunt

364 They . . . curtains] walker (subs.); not in f, q     366 on you] f; to you q



   early 17th century, and the word is more               3.3.327–8, 391; 4.1.196–200). The ven-
   likely to mean ‘spectacle of horror’ (as in            omous ‘aspics’ tongues’ that torment
   Trag. Lear, 5.3.213: OED n. 3b), so that (as           Othello’s bosom in the temptation scene
   in many productions) Lodovico’s ‘Let it be             belong to Iago (3.3.450), giving a special
   hid’ is to be interpreted as a command to              appropriateness to the biblical ‘serpent’s
   close the curtains around the four-poster              curse’ that Emilia calls down upon her
   bed. For the meaning of this theatrical                husband (4.2.16).
   gesture see Neill, ‘ “Unproper Beds” ’, pp.
   258–9, 267–8.                                       364–5 keep . . . fortunes A parallel con-
363 poisons Although Othello is accused                   struction; keep = seize, take possession of.
   by the First Senator of poisoning                   365 the Moor Lodovico’s dismissive refer-
   Desdemona’s affections (1.3.113), it is                ence conclusively returns Othello to the
   Iago whom the play persistently associ-                anonymity of the opening scene.
   ates with diabolic poison, beginning at             366 they . . . you you inherit them.
   1.1.68, when he promises to ‘poison [Bra-           367 censure of the task of passing judge-
   bantio’s] delight’ with his libels on Desde-           ment on
   mona and the Moor (see also 2.1.288;                368 the torture Cf. Giraldi, App. C, p. 445.




                                               398
                              appendix a
                       THE DATE OF THE PLAY

As with many plays of this period, it is difﬁcult to establish the date of Oth-
ello with any certainty. The earliest record of its performance consists of
an entry in the Accounts Book of Sir Edmund Tilney, Master of the Revels
from 1579 to 1610. Tilney noted that on Hallowmas Day (1 November),
1604, ‘the King’s Majesty’s players . . . [acted] a play in the Banqueting
House at Whitehall called The Moor of Venice [by] Shaxberd’ (i.e. Shake-
speare).1 The 1604 court performance provides a terminus ad quem for the
play; and a terminus a quo can be deduced from the fact that much of Oth-
ello’s exotic geographical detail appears to derive from Philemon Holland’s
translation of Pliny’s Historie of the World [Naturalis Historia], published in
1601.2
   Until recently, most scholars have been inclined to assign the play to the
latter part of this span, c.1603–4, at the very beginning of James I’s reign.
In practice this would almost certainly mean that it was ﬁrst staged in
mid-1604, since the theatres were closed during the ﬁnal illness of Queen
Elizabeth in March 1603, and seem to have remained closed through the
terrible plague that ravaged London for the rest of the year, not reopening
until April 1604. So, although a prior season at the Globe is much more
likely, it is just possible that Othello was a completely new play when it was
staged at Whitehall.3 Certainly there are indications that it may have been
written with an eye to the tastes of the company’s new royal patron and
his queen. The King’s interest in the conﬂict between Turkey and Christen-
dom had been proclaimed in a poem celebrating the naval victory over the
Turks at Lepanto (1571), ﬁrst published in 1591. James’s poem was reprint-
ed in 1603, following his accession to the English throne, and might well
have provided a stimulus for Shakespeare’s decision to write about the
Cyprus wars.4 At the same time the choice of a Moorish protagonist was
well calculated to appeal to a passing fascination with blackface exoticism
amongst the Queen’s circle; for it is surely a telling coincidence that the

  1
     The authenticity of this document has been challenged on a number of occa-
sions since its discovery in the nineteenth century—most recently by Charles
Hamilton, In Search of Shakespeare (1985)—but is nevertheless accepted by the
majority of modern scholars, including Sanders and Honigmann.
   2
     See Commentary, 3.3.331; 5.2.143, 348–9; App. F(ii–iii).
   3
     This position is argued, for example, by the Textual Companion, p. 93.
   4
     See Emrys Jones, ‘Othello, Lepanto and the Cyprus Wars’, SS 21, 47–58; and
Sanders, Introduction, p. 2.

                                     399
                                 Appendix A

programme of court entertainments in the winter of 1604/5 also included
Ben Jonson’s masque Blackness, an African fantasy written at the request
of Queen Anne, in which she and her ladies appeared as the dusky ‘daugh-
ters of Niger’. However, a possible reference to Othello in Dekker and Mid-
dleton’s The Honest Whore (Part 1), ﬁrst performed in 1604 and entered in
the Stationers’ Register on 9 November in the same year, makes it probable
the play had already made its public debut, and that the players (as they
typically did) were simply presenting the Court with an established popu-
lar success—albeit one well tailored to current royal fads.
   The idea that Othello might be Shakespeare’s ﬁrst Jacobean tragedy has
received additional support from its links with a second play which his
company contributed to the royal revels in the winter of 1604/5: Measure
for Measure, which is usually dated to that year, was offered at court on 26
December; and because it derives its plot from the same source as Othello—
Giambattista Giraldi Cinthio’s collection of novelle, Gli Hecatommithi
(1565)—it is entirely possible that the dramatist worked on the two plays at
about the same time. The mysterious recurrence in Othello (1.3.16) of the
name given to Measure for Measure’s protagonist, Angelo, might be taken
as a further pointer in this direction.1 However, the dating of Measure for
Measure itself is by no means secure; and in any case (as the example of
Shakespeare’s Roman plays indicates) years might sometimes intervene
between the dramatist’s various uses of the same source work.
   By an odd coincidence, however, the name Angelo, given to the com-
mander of the galleys whose report the Sailor delivers to the Venetian Sen-
ate in 1.3, has also been used to link Othello with another text that seemed
to point to a composition date of c.1604—Richard Knolles’s The Generall
Historie of the Turkes (1603). Dedicated to the King, Knolles’s work makes
its own appeal to James’s interest in the Turkish wars. It gives a complete
account of the prolonged struggle for control of the eastern Mediter-
ranean that provides the backdrop for Othello; and some of its details
suggest that Shakespeare might have consulted it. Knolles, for example,
mentions a Venetian commander called Angelus Sorianus (Angelo Sori-
ano) who may be the ‘Signor Angelo’ of the Sailor’s report (1.3.16), and
(in a passage that might have shaped the Messenger’s account of Turkish
tactics at 1.3.34–6) he describes how, prior to the siege of Nicosia in 1570,
two Turkish ﬂeets met at Rhodes before sailing on to Cyprus.2 The fact that
Knolles’s prefatory epistle is dated ‘the last of September, 1603’ might
seem to establish late 1603 as the earliest possible date of composition.

  1
     The name in Measure for Measure derives from Giraldi, where, however, it
belongs not to the protagonist, Juriste, but to his sister, Angela.
  2
     Bullough includes Knolles as a ‘probable source’, and the case for supposing
that Shakespeare made use of the Generall Historie has been supported by Stanley
Wells in a letter to TLS, 20 July 1984; see also TC, p. 126.

                                      400
                                  Appendix A

Nevertheless the parallels between the two texts are not sufﬁciently precise
or extensive to put Shakespeare’s use of Knolles beyond dispute; and in
any case, given that the dramatist clearly moved in circles that gave him
access to private manuscripts,1 it is not impossible that he might have read
the Generall Historie before it went to press.
   That said, there is a certain amount of circumstantial evidence to suggest
that Othello may actually have been written as early as 1601–2; and this
receives some support from recent work on vocabulary and metrics which
offers signiﬁcant clues to the chronology of Shakespeare’s oeuvre.The most
telling hints of this possibility are to be found in a number of apparent
echoes of Othello found in the 1603 ‘bad quarto’ of Hamlet (Q1)—turns of
phrase whose appearance is most easily explained as the result
of memorial error by someone familiar with both plays;2 and since Q1 Ham-
let is a patchwork text that seems to have been assembled by an actor or
reporter prepared to eke out the deﬁciencies of his memory in any way pos-
sible, the borrowing can only have been in one direction. Thus the Ghost’s
‘to my unfolding | Lend thy listening ear’ (Q1 Hamlet, C3v–4) seems to
derive from Desdemona’s ‘To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear’
(1.3.243); Q1’s ending probably adapts ‘look upon this tragic spectacle’ (I4)
from Lodovico’s injunction at the end of Othello ‘Look on the tragic loading
of this bed’ (5.2.362); while the expression ‘Olympus-high’ (Q1 Hamlet, I1v)
sounds like another unconscious borrowing from Othello (2.1.183). Finally,
it seems possible that the mysterious substitution of the unusual name
‘Montano’ for ‘Reynaldo’ in Q1 may simply have resulted from these two
minor parts being played by the same actor.3 Since the Q1 title-page refers to
Hamlet’s performance ‘by his Highness’ servants’, it must have been pub-
lished after 19 May 1603, when Shakespeare’s company, formerly the Lord
Chamberlain’s Men, were taken under the patronage of the new king. But
Honigmann believes that its text was probably in existence nearly a year
before this; for he argues that news of plans to publish an ‘unauthorized’
text of Hamlet must have reached the ears of the company by 26 July 1602.


   1
     The numerous echoes of Florio’s Montaigne in Hamlet, and of Strachey’s True
Reportory of the Wracke in The Tempest, for example, make it plain that Shakespeare
must have had access to these texts in manuscript form.
   2
     First noted by Alfred Hart in ‘The date of Othello’, TLS, 10 October 1935, and
subsequently ampliﬁed by J. C. Maxwell in ‘Othello and the Bad Quarto of Hamlet’,
N&Q 21 (1974), 130, and Ernst Honigmann, ‘The First Quarto of Hamlet and the
Date of Othello’, RES 44 (1993), 211–19. See also Honigmann’s edition, Appendix 1,
‘Date’, pp. 344–5.
   3
     This possibility is compromised, however, by the even more peculiar replace-
ment of Polonius with ‘Corambis’—a name otherwise known only (in the form
‘Corambus’) from a casual reference in All’s Well (4.3.167). It may be that both
names were simply remembered from an earlier (possibly non-Shakespearian) ver-
sion of Hamlet.

                                       401
                                    Appendix A

On that date James Roberts (who would print the presumably ‘authorized’
Q2 in late 1604) entered the play in the Stationers’ Register. This Honig-
mann thinks was a ‘blocking entry’ designed to inhibit a publication of
which the players disapproved.
   If Honigmann is right in the latter conjecture, then the company’s
manoeuvre was not successful for long; and the apparent echoes of
Othello in Q1 Hamlet, though more convincing than the Textual Companion
was prepared to allow, are insufﬁcient in themselves to be decisive.1
But Honigmann ﬁnds further evidence for an early date in the casting
requirements of Othello and Twelfth Night (c.1601–2), which he sees
as ‘remarkably alike’ (Arden, p. 346); and he goes on to suggest that the
parts of Viola and Desdemona were both originally written for a boy actor
with a good singing voice, further proposing that the cutting of the Willow
Song from Q might have been due to the same circumstance (presumably
the breaking of the boy’s voice) that seemingly required the transfer of the
song ‘Come away, death’ from Viola to Feste in Twelfth Night (p. 347). If he
is right, then the most likely date for the ﬁrst performance of Othello will
have been in the ﬁrst half of 1602—or perhaps even late 1601.
   As indicated above, there is some internal evidence to support such a
dating: for, while the metrical tests and those for colloquialism-in-verse
analysed by the Textual Companion seemed to place Othello with (or soon
after) Measure for Measure (1603) and a little before All’s Well (1604–5), its
tests for word rarity brought the play closer to Henry V (1598–9), Hamlet
(1600–1), and Troilus and Cressida (1602). The links with Hamlet and
Troilus have subsequently been supported by MacDonald Jackson, citing a
number of metrical and vocabulary tests. In a careful statistical analysis of
the metrical indices compiled by Ants Oras, Jackson has shown that, at
least as far as pause-patterns are concerned, Othello’s closest correlations
are with Hamlet, Troilus, Merry Wives, Twelfth Night, and Measure for Mea-
sure, in that order.2 Jackson notes that the average date of this group is
1601, close to Hamlet; however, if we exclude Merry Wives (statistically
problematic, as he admits, because so much of it is in prose), the average is
1602, exactly Honigmann’s preferred date.
   Such tests, while highly suggestive, can never be decisive, however—
as Jackson’s wildly diverse correlations for Troilus and Cressida


  1
     Textual Companion, p. 126.
  2
     See Ants Oras, Pause Patterns in Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama (Gainesville, Fl.,
1960); and MacD. P. Jackson, ‘Pause Patterns in Shakespeare’s Verse’, Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 17 (2002), 37–46. Other evidence for this probability is cited in
Jackson’s earlier essay, ‘Another Metrical Index for Shakespeare’s Plays: Evidence
for Chronology and Authorship’, Neuphilologische Mitteilungen, 4 (1994), 453–8:
particularly persuasive are the ﬁgures for percentages of unstopped lines, which
again place Othello very close to Hamlet.

                                         402
                                   Appendix A

reveal;1 and there are grounds for a degree of scepticism about some parts
of Honigmann’s argument too. The evidence he cites for associating Othel-
lo with Twelfth Night seems especially shaky, for the casting patterns he
detects sometimes depend on rather tendentious descriptions of the actor-
ly ‘lines’ or specialisms involved in particular roles; and, since there is little
sign of similar patterns in other plays thought to be written at about the
same time (As You Like It, Hamlet, Troilus and Cressida), the seeming resem-
blances may be purely accidental. Moreover, Honigmann’s conjectures
about the boy actor’s singing voice become irrelevant if, as I argue in my
discussion of the text, the text of Q Othello derives from a later revival of
the play. Honigmann himself admits that there are ‘steps in [his] reason-
ing that cannot be proved’ (p. 350); and the acceptance of 1601–2 as the
most likely date for the play has the effect of creating a rather odd gap in
the dramatist’s chronology. Whereas for most of his working life Shake-
speare produced (on average) two plays a year, Honigmann’s proposal
would appear to make 1603—just when the extended closure of the
theatres might have given the dramatist more leisure for writing than
usual—an exceptionally unproductive year.
   So, while the apparent echoes of Othello in Q1 Hamlet, combined with
the internal evidence compiled by Jackson and others, point strongly
towards 1602, we still cannot rule out the possibility that Shakespeare
worked on this play, and perhaps on Measure for Measure, in 1603. Given
that the players could not know when playing would be resumed in
London there is no reason why they might not have begun rehearsing a
new play in the course of that year; and (given that we know little of how
the King’s Men survived during the long closure) it is even possible, as the
Textual Companion proposes, that Othello was ﬁrst staged as part of a
provincial tour—perhaps during their sojourn at Oxford in 1603–4.2
Moreover, it remains entirely conceivable that Q1 Hamlet was assembled
and published towards the end of 1603; and, if that were the case, then its
text could still have been contaminated by a play written earlier in that
year. On that basis, it would remain entirely possible for Shakespeare to
have consulted Knolles’s Generall Historie—at least in manuscript—whilst
writing Othello.
   The one thing we can say with some certainty was that Othello was the
next tragedy that Shakespeare wrote after Hamlet. In mood, if not perhaps
in strict chronology, these two plays belong with the darker ‘Jacobean’
Shakespeare; and the action of Othello centres on the relationship between


  1
    The closest correlations for this play are with Merry Wives (1597–8), Richard II
(1595), Othello, 2 Henry IV (1597–8), and Contention (2 Henry VI; 1591).
  2 TC, p. 126. See also MacD. P. Jackson, ‘Editions and Textual Studies’, SS 38

(1985), 245–6.

                                       403
                                 Appendix A

two ﬁgures who are infected with a more extreme version of the misogyny
and sexual nausea that taints the hero of the earlier tragedy—qualities
that are equally conspicuous in two of the plays that have most in common
with Othello stylistically and that are probably closest to it in time, Troilus
and Cressida (1601–2), and Measure for Measure (1603–4). All things con-
sidered, then, a date of 1602–3 is as close as we are likely to get—at least in
default of some hitherto unsuspected evidence for more precise dating.




                                     404
                                 appendix b
                        THE TEXTS OF THE PLAY


The Textual Problem
Othello presents an editor with daunting textual problems. The play,
despite its great popularity, remained unpublished until six years after
Shakespeare’s death, when two signiﬁcantly different editions appeared in
quick succession—a separate Quarto text (Q) in 1622, and a slightly longer
version included as part of the First Folio of Shakespeare’s plays (F) in
1623. F contains approximately 160 lines that are absent from Q, including
a number of extended passages and some well-known set-pieces; while Q
has generally fuller and more elaborate stage directions, and includes a
scattering of lines and phrases missing from F, as well as 63 oaths and
profanities either purged or diluted in the later version. In addition, there
are over a thousand small variations in wording, lineation, spelling, and
punctuation—some of which involve signiﬁcant adjustments of tone and
nuance; whilst scattered press correction of each text has produced a
small number of minor variants both within and between the two. With
only a few exceptions, there has been broad agreement amongst editors
and textual critics that both Q and F derive from a manuscript (or from sep-
arate manuscripts) in Shakespeare’s own hand—either directly or from
scribal transcripts of the original. Thus each has claims to authority; but,
after more than seventy years of intense debate, the exact nature of their
relationship with one another and with Shakespeare’s original version (or
versions) remains, in the words of one editor, ‘a . . . mystery’.1
   A third text, the Second Quarto of 1630 (Q2), while it has no indepen-
dent authority, also demands serious attention, since it offers a carefully
corrected version of Q, produced by an editor who made extensive use of F.
Not only did this editor incorporate several passages completely absent
from Q, he frequently preferred F’s individual variants, and sometimes
even ventured emendations of his own. It is difﬁcult to understand why
any publisher should have gone to the trouble and expense of so far-
reaching a revision, unless Q were recognized as being in some respects
defective; moreover, as Thomas L. Berger has argued, any modern scholar
seeking to adjudicate between the different readings of Q and F is well

  1
    Scott McMillin, ‘The Othello Quarto and the “Foul-Paper” Hypothesis’, SQ 51
(2000), 67–85 (p. 67). An expanded version of McMillin’s essay appears as his intro-
duction to The First Quarto of Othello (Cambridge, 2001), and its ideas are further
developed in ‘The Mystery of the Early Othello Texts’, in Kolin, pp. 401–24.

                                       405
                                   Appendix B

advised to pay attention to the decisions of this thoughtful and often
meticulous editor—not because he had access (as was once supposed) to
any independent manuscript source of his own, but because his privil-
eged position as the playwright’s near contemporary, combined with his
evident intelligence, makes him a uniquely well-informed witness.1
  So far, the most elaborate attempt to solve the vexed relationship
between Q and F is E. A. J. Honigmann’s study, The Texts of ‘Othello’ and
Shakespearian Revision (1996), to which readers are referred for a full
account of the play’s textual difﬁculties. The work of a formidable textual
scholar, this book represents the fruit of many years’ meditation and
research, stretching back to the author’s earlier study The Stability of
Shakespeare’s Text (1965); yet its arguments, based as they are on the New
Bibliographical methods developed by Pollard, Greg, and Dover Wilson,
have proved at least as contentious as those of earlier scholars—especially
in the light of current scepticism about the narrative assumptions on
which New Bibliographical methodology was constructed. Moreover,
Honigmann’s telling reluctance to apply the full logic of his conclusions to
his own Arden edition of the play is evidence of the continuing intract-
ability of the problems he addresses.2 Consensus, unfortunately, seems
as far away as ever.


Quarto and Folio
‘The Tragedie of Othello, the moore of Venice’ was entered in the Station-
ers’ Register on 6 October 1621 by Thomas Walkley, the bookseller for
whom Q was printed early in the following year. Walkley’s title-page
proudly advertised his text as reproducing the play ‘As it hath beene diuerse
times acted at the | Globe, and at the Black-Friers, by | his Maiesties Seru-
ants’; and the Q text, as we shall see, has characteristics that suggest
derivation from a fairly reliable playhouse manuscript. According to
Honigmann, however, it appeared under somewhat suspicious circum-
stances. Arguing, like his New Bibliography predecessors, that the acting

  1
     Berger, ‘The Second Quarto of Othello and the Question of Textual “Auth-
ority” ’, in Virginia Vaughan and Kent Cartwright, Othello: New Perspectives
(Madison, Wisc., 1991), 26–47 (pp. 30–2). An earlier form of Berger’s essay ap-
peared in Analytical and Enumerative Bibliography, ns 2 (1988), 141–50.
   2
     Whilst stressing that any modern editor will be driven to some degree of textu-
al conﬂation when faced with two texts, neither of which is wholly trustworthy,
Honigmann concludes, somewhat nervously, that Q (despite being less reliable with
regard to substantive variants) should nevertheless be regarded as the marginally
more dependable text because of its allegedly greater ﬁdelity to a Shakespearian
original. However, he immediately backs away from the conclusion that Q should
therefore be employed as a copy text, declaring that (for unexplained reasons) it
would be undesirable ‘at this point in time’ (Texts, p. 146).

                                       406
                                     Appendix B

companies needed to protect their ﬁnancial interest in their own plays by
keeping them out of the hands of unscrupulous stationers,1 Honigmann
makes much of the fact that, with the exception of the so-called ‘Pavier
quartos’—all of them reprints—not one of Shakespeare’s plays had found
its way into print between 1609 and 1621; he attributes this to steadfast
protection of their own interests by the King’s Men, whose right to dispose
of their own playscripts had been reasserted as recently as 1619 in a letter
from the Lord Chamberlain to the Court of the Stationers’ Company.
Moreover, he maintains that the imminent appearance of the ambitious
and expensive First Folio collection, under the aegis of two leading mem-
bers of the King’s Men, would have given Shakespeare’s old company a
more immediate incentive for maintaining their exclusive control over the
text of a tragedy as popular as Othello. Nevertheless Walkley somehow
managed to acquire ownership of his copy—thereby ensuring that
the players would have to negotiate with him before this play could be
included in the Folio.
   Although there is no way of knowing exactly how Walkley came by his
copy, Honigmann’s own researches and those of Peter Blayney have cast a
somewhat dubious light on the character of this bookseller and of his
printer, Nicholas Okes: the often unscrupulous Walkley (dubbed a ‘fasci-
nating rogue’ by Honigmann) turns out to have been in severe ﬁnancial
difﬁculties in 1621, whilst Okes was a notoriously sharp operator who had
already been in trouble for printing pirated work.2 Consequently Honig-
mann has conjectured that corrupt practice was probably involved when
these two obtained their manuscript copy of Othello. Nevertheless, as Scott
McMillin has pointed out, Walkley’s position seems to have been strong
enough to enable him to exert continued rights over his own version of the
text: he successfully entered the play in the Stationers’ Register on 6 Octo-
ber 1621, in spite of the staying order recently secured by the actors; and
he thus retained publication rights until 1628, when he sold the tragedy
(along with three more of the company’s plays, which he had published
between 1619 and 1625) to Richard Hawkins, who produced a second
quarto edition two years later. All of this suggests that some sort of under-
standing was reached with Shakespeare’s company, preserving Walkley’s


   1
     See e.g. A. W. Pollard, Shakespeare’s Fight with the Pirates and the Problems of the
Transmission of his Text (1917).
   2
     Honigmann, Texts, pp. 22–9, and Peter W. M. Blayney, The Texts of ‘King Lear’
and their Origins, vol. 1 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 298–9. In addition to Othello, Okes
was employed to print a pair of Beaumont and Fletcher plays, which Walkley had
somehow acquired from the King’s Men at about the same time. It is probably sig-
niﬁcant, as the Textual Companion points out, that of the other King’s Men plays
published by Walkley between 1619 and 1625, all four seem to have been printed
from private transcripts.

                                          407
                                 Appendix B

interest in the play while publication of the Folio went ahead (McMillin,
Q, p. 16).
   The precise circumstances under which Walkley acquired his
manuscript have been regarded as important because they might have
implications for the reliability of the Q text. However, as Honigmann
acknowledges, stolen goods are not necessarily inferior or damaged goods,
and it remains possible that ‘a wicked stationer may “procure” a good
text’.1 Moreover, there were perfectly legitimate ways in which Walkley
could have acquired his copy: he might have bought one of the ‘private’
manuscripts which the players sometimes made for patrons and friends, or
he might even have obtained a manuscript from the company itself—for
the recent work of Blayney has shown that, since the publication of plays
was much less proﬁtable than Pollard and others supposed, it was actually
the acting companies, keen to advertise their wares by any means possible,
who had the greatest interest in getting plays into print.2 But even if Walk-
ley’s manuscript was of entirely respectable provenance that would not
guarantee its authority; for just as stolen copy could be good copy, even
impeccably acquired manuscripts might be defective. Indeed, as the the-
ories of Alice Walker and (more recently) Scott McMillin would indicate,
manuscripts acquired from company sources were especially liable to be
compromised by their playhouse origins: they might, that is to say, incor-
porate alterations made in the course of performance by someone other
than the dramatist; and, if a manuscript were then assembled (as some of
Q’s readings suggest) by dictation, it might also reproduce memorial errors
on the part of the actors.
   Of course, to those like Andrew Gurr who have begun to think of early
modern plays as essentially collaborative products, for which the drama-
tist’s original script supplied no more than the necessary groundwork,
such alterations are a necessary part of the play-making process; and it
follows that a demotic performance-based script, incorporating cuts and
other alterations made (with or without the author’s approval) should
arguably be credited with greater authority than a fuller, but necessarily
more ‘literary’, text closer to the author’s original. From this perspective,
the New Bibliographical ambition to reconstruct a text representing as
accurately as possible what Shakespeare actually wrote is dismissed as part
of a post-Romantic fetishization of the author, entirely inappropriate to
early modern conditions of dramatic production. This edition assumes,
however, that because any playhouse version, by its very nature,


  1
    Honigmann, Texts, p. 28.
  2
    See Peter W. M. Blayney, ‘The Publication of Playbooks’, in John D. Cox and
David Scott Kastan, A New History of Early English Drama (New York, 1997),
183–422.

                                     408
                                  Appendix B

represents a series of choices that foreclose on other possibilities latent
in the dramatist’s ‘maximal’ script, there are sound practical reasons
for producing a text as close as we can make it to that more expansive
version—even if the idea of re-creating an ideal ‘original’ now looks hope-
lessly chimerical.
   Whatever its history of transmission, the Quarto text differed in impor-
tant respects from the version that would appear little more than a year
later in the Folio volume assembled by Shakespeare’s fellow actors John
Heminge and Henry Condell for the stationers William and Isaac Jaggard.1
In an implicit challenge to previously published versions, the Jaggard title-
page presented the plays in this collection as ‘Published according to the
True Originall Copies’. Heminge and Condell similarly boasted that the
new texts, ‘cured and perfect of their limbs’, would replace the ‘stolen and
surreptitious copies’ now in circulation, which they dismissed as ‘maimed
and deformed by the frauds and stealths of injurious impostors’. In point of
fact the Folio actually made use of existing quarto editions as copy for
some plays; but for others (including some that, like Othello, had previous-
ly appeared in ‘good’ quartos) they clearly had access to independent
manuscript copy.
   Modern bibliographers and textual critics, whilst acknowledging that in
some cases quarto texts might be closer to the autograph manuscript orig-
inally supplied to the players, have recognized that the compilers of the
Folio, as senior members of the King’s Men, were uniquely placed to
obtain what they thought were the best copies of their colleague’s work. F
has thus been granted a particular claim to textual authority—even if the
material circumstances of its production created the potential for various
kinds of error and sophistication. However, this consensus has been com-
plicated in recent years by a growing belief that, in some instances at least,
divergences between Quarto and Folio versions may represent signiﬁcant
revision of the original work, presumably by the dramatist himself. This
has been most persuasively argued with respect to Hamlet and King Lear. In
the case of Hamlet, the situation is further complicated by the existence of
no fewer than three different texts—including the truncated First Quarto
with its oddly discrepant character names and markedly different arrange-
ment of the text. The effect of current textual scholarship has been to sug-
gest that the text of a popular Renaissance play was a much more ﬂuid
thing than author-centred, print-oriented literary and textual criticism
have been prepared to allow—so that rather than imagining an ideal ver-
sion of any given play, its form ﬁxed at the point where the dramatist’s


  1
    William Jaggard is described by Honigmann as the printer of F; but by 1623 ill-
ness had forced him to hand over the running of his printshop to his son, Isaac,
whose name appears (along with that of Edward Blount) on the title-page.

                                       409
                                   Appendix B

‘ﬁnal intentions’ were realized, or even at the point of ‘original perform-
ance’, we might do better to think of a theatrical work as an inﬁnitely vari-
able diachronic phenomenon, of which the surviving printed texts
represent more or less arbitrarily chosen cross-sections.1
   In the course of its lifetime a play could be changed in a variety of ways:
additions and alterations might be made by the original author, they
might be commissioned from another playwright (as we know to have hap-
pened with The Spanish Tragedy and Dr Faustus, and as seems to have hap-
pened with Macbeth), or they might be imposed by the actors themselves.2
A script might be cut or revised for a wide variety of reasons: some of these
might be trivial—to suit the changing composition of the company, to
match the needs of particular venues, to bring the play up to date by
adding or removing topical allusions, or to accommodate the pressures of
occasional censorship; others might be more signiﬁcant—to incorporate
actors’ suggestions, to respond to the experience of performance, or to
allow for the playwright’s second thoughts about his own dramatic design.
In the case of King Lear, it is now widely accepted that the F text, with its
frequent omissions and occasional ampliﬁcations, its re-assignment of
speeches and altered stage directions, and its omission of the Doctor’s part,
is sufﬁciently transformed to constitute an alternative version of the
play—and one that seems distinctively Shakespearian. The decision to
revise was perhaps prompted by the dramatist’s experience of working
on the play in the theatre, since a number of changes seem designed to
tighten the dramatic action at key points, while others involve signiﬁcant
modiﬁcations to the treatment of such key characters as the Fool and
Cordelia.Taken together, they are sufﬁciently extensive to have persuaded a
number of editors to publish separate or parallel-text editions of what they
regard as discrete versions of the play.
   In the case of Othello, however, although the New Cambridge
Shakespeare has published a separately edited text of the First Quarto, the
differences between Q and F are by no means so great as those between Q

  1
     Thus Gurr, in ‘Maximal and Minimal Texts: Shakespeare v. the Globe’ (SS 52
(1999), 68–87) and in his introduction to The First Quarto of Henry V (Cambridge,
2000), argues that the 1986 Oxford editors’ quest for a text approximating as close-
ly as possible to that performed by Shakespeare’s company in his own lifetime was
necessarily chimerical. ‘When we recognize’, Gurr writes, ‘what a high-speed
process it was to produce the plays for original performance, how irregular those
original performances were, how liable to change the conditions of playing, and
how ﬂexible the text had to be as it was taken from page to stage, we can see that
there is little hope of retrieving from the text much of the original performance, and
that a concept of a ﬁxed “performance text” is a misconception’ (Introduction, p. 2).
   2
     See Eric Rasmussen, ‘The Revision of Scripts’, chap. 23 of Cox and Kastan
(eds.), New History of Early English Drama.


                                        410
                                 Appendix B

and F Lear, or even between Q2 and F Hamlet; and, whilst Q may represent
something closer to a performance text, there is no real suggestion that dis-
tinct alternative versions of the play are at issue. Nevertheless, the unusu-
ally large number of variations—together with the generally accepted
superiority of F’s substantive variants—has led some scholars to suppose
that the play was subject to a measure of authorial revision. As we shall
see, there are several objections to this hypothesis. Not the least of these is
the fact that—in striking contrast to Lear, where revision seems to have
involved substantial cutting—the Folio text of Othello makes signiﬁcant
additions to an already lengthy play. These include such important set-
pieces as Othello’s Pontic Sea speech in 3.3, and Desdemona’s Willow Song
in 4.3—the last of which is added at precisely the point in the action where
(because of the danger of ﬂagging pace) one might more easily expect cuts
to be applied.


The Scholarly Debate
The ﬁrst serious attempt to account for the divergences between the two
texts was made by the distinguished bibliographer and theatre historian
E. K. Chambers, who argued in 1930 that Q and F must rest substantially
upon the same original, even though they had clearly been printed from
separate manuscripts—an early and somewhat careless scribal transcript
in the case of Q, and the dramatist’s holograph in the case of F.1 Both F
and Q were to be thought of as ‘good’ texts, though F was generally more
authoritative, except where it had been sophisticated by the expurgation
of swearing and profanity—presumably in response to the 1606 Act to
Restrain Abuses. Chambers’s theories, which provided ample warrant for
the extensive editorial conﬂation underlying most modern editions, won
general acceptance. But in 1952 Alice Walker, co-editor of the New Cam-
bridge Othello (1957), published a provocative essay calling the received
narrative into question. In this paper, and in the book-length study of Tex-
tual Problems that followed, Walker argued that F was in fact printed from
a corrected copy of Q.2 This, she maintained, was consistent with F’s
general practice of working from printed copy wherever it was available
(‘Texts’, p. 18). She based her argument principally on the presence of a
number of common errors in the two texts, and on some orthographical
anomalies seemingly incompatible with the two-manuscript theory. In the



  1
    William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1930).
  2
    ‘The 1622 Quarto and the First Folio Texts of Othello’, SS 5 (1952), 16–24;
Textual Problems of the First Folio (Cambridge, 1953).


                                     411
                                    Appendix B

case of Othello, she supposed, the F compilers were aware of deﬁciencies in
the Q text which made extensive correction from a company manuscript
desirable.
   Walker proposed that Q itself derived from a prompt-book, already
marred by performance cuts, which had been further mutilated by its
transcriber, a book-keeper who relied extensively on his memory, thereby
introducing ‘not only some corruptions which had established themselves
on the stage . . . but also some nonce readings of his own’. This would
account for the very high number of variants between Q and F, and for
what Walker saw as the ‘quite shocking inferiority’ of so many Q readings.
While Walker’s arguments in some ways conﬁrmed ‘the general superiori-
ty of the Folio text’, her conviction that F derived substantially from Q
suggested that ‘neither text may be as good as it seems’, thereby licensing
an even greater margin of editorial discretion in responding to ‘the many
bafﬂing problems of this text’.1
   Walker’s case for the prompt-book origins and memorial corruption of
the Q text proved controversial, partly because Q, especially in its inconsis-
tent and sometimes offhand treatment of stage directions, did not bear the
supposedly characteristic marks of playhouse origins; consequently the
inﬂuential W. W. Greg preferred to suppose that the Q printer’s copy had
been a late and rather hastily made transcript of Shakespeare’s ﬁrst draft
(or ‘foul papers’) that was itself difﬁcult to read.2 Greg’s arguments con-
cerning the foul-papers origin of Q proved so persuasive that they became
the basis for most editorial approaches to that text; but Walker’s central
idea concerning F’s use of Q copy won wide acceptance, attracting the
support of such textual luminaries as Greg himself, Fredson Bowers, and
Charlton Hinman.3 Before long, however, this new consensus faced a
number of challenges—from the editorial conclusions of M. R. Ridley,

   1
     Problems, pp. 152–3; ‘Texts’, p. 23; Problems, p. 138; ‘Texts’, p. 24; Problems,
p. 161.
   2
     Greg, The Shakespeare First Folio, pp. 357–74. One deﬁciency of Greg’s position
was that it failed to account for the presence of cuts in Q. Latterly, the whole status
of ‘foul papers’ as a signiﬁcant element in textual transmission has been called in
question by Paul Werstine. Pointing out that ‘no example of Greg’s idealized “foul
papers”—the author’s original and ultimate draft much corrected—has yet been
identiﬁed’, Werstine maintains that there is no good evidence for supposing that
playwrights ever delivered their work to the players in anything less than a fair
copy—see his ‘Narratives About Printed Shakespeare Texts: “Foul Papers” and
“Bad” Quartos’, SQ 41 (1990), 65–86 (esp. p. 81), and ‘Post-theory Problems in
Shakespeare Editing’ (unpublished manuscript).
   3
     Fredson Bowers, Bibliography and Textual Criticism (Oxford, 1964), chap. 6, ‘The
Copy for the Folio Othello’; Charlton Hinman, Othello 1622 (Oxford, 1975), p. xiv,
and Hinman, The Printing and Proof-Reading of the First Folio of Shakespeare, 2 vols.
(Oxford, 1963), i. 4.


                                         412
                                 Appendix B

from the theatrically-based examination of F’s ‘additions’ by Nevill
Coghill, and from the more rigorous bibliographical analysis of J. K.
Walton.
   In his 1958 Arden edition, Ridley offered a serious objection to Walker’s
belief in quarto copy for the Folio; this took the form of a simple but unan-
swerable question involving the reduced number of stage directions in F:
‘why [would] any sane person, preparing a copy of Q1 to serve as copy for
F, deliberately delete a number of stage-directions, including almost all
those which illuminate business?’ (p. 218). Ridley went on to maintain
that nearly all of the ‘vulgarizations’ by which Walker purported to
demonstrate the supposed inferiority of Q could, depending on one’s aes-
thetic perspective, be justiﬁed as more effective readings, sophisticated
away by the enfeebling interference of the F editor(s). He concluded that
Greg was right in thinking that Q derived fairly directly from Shakespeare’s
‘foul papers’, probably via a transcript made for a private collector, while F
was based on a second transcript, deriving from a prompt-book that
included ‘a good deal of Shakespeare’s second thoughts’, but that also
probably exhibited memorial contamination from the prompter, and
sophistication from the editorial work of Heminge and Condell. He there-
fore departed from accepted practice by making Q the copy-text for his
edition.
   Whilst Ridley’s belief in the superior authority of Q has not been widely
accepted, the notion that F might incorporate elements of authorial revi-
sion received additional support from Nevill Coghill in Shakespeare’s Profes-
sional Skills (1964): Coghill proposed that the F passages whose absence
from Q had been interpreted by Greg and others as evidence of theatrical
cutting were more readily explained as additions made in the course of
Shakespeare’s own revision of the play—one immediately occasioned, he
conjectured, by the need to respond to the Act to Restrain Abuses, but
which conveniently allowed the dramatist to answer his own ‘dissatisfac-
tion with certain features of the play as it was ﬁrst written’ (p. 167). Coghill
could see no reason why the company would have allowed a transcript of
the play to have been made in around 1620, when Heminge and Condell
were already preparing the Folio edition, nor why they should have
allowed any authority to the fruit of such a transcript. Ignoring the pos-
sibility that Walkley might have obtained access to a private transcript, he
accordingly maintained that Q must have been printed from the original
prompt-copy ‘made (with the usual mistakes) from Shakespeare’s “foul
papers” by the book-keeper in, or shortly before, 1604’; F, on the other
hand, will have been printed from ‘a second prompt copy, made (also with
the usual mistakes) from a revised set of foul-papers, in or not long after
1606’; the common errors he accounted for by supposing that, when
making the second transcript, the book-keeper might have dealt with the

                                     413
                                    Appendix B

notorious difﬁculty of Shakespeare’s handwriting by consulting the
earlier prompt-book.1
  Coghill’s belief in discrete manuscript origins for F and Q received
powerful bibliographical support from J. K. Walton in 1971; whilst his
arguments for revision were enthusiastically taken up in the 1980s, when
interest in the idea of Shakespeare as reviser reached a peak with Gary
Taylor’s and Michael Warren’s inﬂuential collection of essays on the two
texts of Lear.2 In his extensive study of the use of quarto copy by the
Folio printers, Walton challenged the whole basis of Alice Walker’s case,
arguing that the number of unmistakable common errors in the two
Othello texts was no greater than could be accounted for by chance,3 and
maintaining that the large number of indifferent variants could only be
explained by derivation from separate manuscripts—especially since a
high proportion of them were of a kind unlikely to be introduced by simple
compositorial carelessness. Walton could see no reason why, if Heminge
and Condell had good manuscript copy at their disposal, it would have
been thought worthwhile to undertake the laborious task of collating it
with a printed text—especially since the amount of correction involved
would often have produced copy that was messier and harder to read than
the manuscript itself.4 More recently, however, Ernst Honigmann has
revived Walker’s theory in a modiﬁed form, proposing that the scribe
responsible for the manuscript behind F must have consulted Q at some
points where his own copy had become illegible (Texts, p. 94).
  However, the notion that F could actually have been set from a marked-
up copy of Q was ﬁnally laid to rest by the work of Gary Taylor (1983) and
MacDonald Jackson (1987). Building on the compositorial analyses of
Charlton Hinman and Trevor Howard-Hill, which showed that printing
work on the Folio Othello had been divided between the experienced

   1
     Coghill, p. 167. A difﬁculty with Coghill’s argument is that it requires the book-
keeper to have transcribed nonsense from the original, on the grounds that ‘he was
accustomed to hearing it’ on the stage (p. 168); but it seems improbable that such
stuff would have survived in the theatre, given that the dramatist was himself a per-
forming member of the company.
   2
     Gary Taylor and Michael Warren (eds.), The Division of the Kingdoms:
Shakespeare’s Two Versions of ‘King Lear’ (Oxford, 1983).
   3
     J. K. Walton, The Quarto Copy for the First Folio of Shakespeare (Dublin, 1971).
Statistically speaking, Walton’s argument seems quite plausible; but if, for example,
‘exufﬂicate’ at 3.3.185 results from a misreading (as it seems to do), it is hard to
explain how this otherwise unknown word could have found its way into both Q and
F; and if ‘place of sense’ and ‘time of scorn’, printed by both Q and F at 2.3.158 and
4.2.54, are accepted as accidental transpositions (as they are by most editors), it is
difﬁcult to believe in anything other than a common origin for such errors.
   4
     Walton, pp. 38–41, 117–19, 124–41, 183–227; for obvious reasons, variants
introduced by a compositor tend to be similar in form as well as sense, whilst those
in the Othello texts are generally of a more divergent character.

                                         414
                                    Appendix B

Compositor B and the novice Compositor E, Taylor demonstrated a diver-
gence in spelling and punctuation between Q and F quite incompatible
with the usual practice of E who normally followed his copy fairly closely in
these matters.1 Taylor was able to conclude, therefore, that F ‘cannot have
been set from printed copy’ (p. 60); and his thesis is borne out by Jackson’s
analysis of F misreadings: since these are overwhelmingly concentrated in
the stints of Compositor E, ‘[t]he only convincing explanation . . . is that
both compositors were setting from manuscript, and that the naïve and
inept Compositor E misread his copy far more often than the experienced
Compositor B’.2
   Taylor’s explanation for the substantive variations between Q and F was
that F was printed from a manuscript that (as Coghill had argued) incor-
porated the dramatist’s own revisions of the Q version. The patterns of
spelling and punctuation, however, indicated that another scribal hand
must have intervened between Shakespeare’s revised manuscript and the
printed text. This is the position elaborated in the Textual Companion
(1987), where Wells and Taylor further argue that while ‘F . . . brings
us closer to Shakespeare’s ﬁnal text than Q1’, nevertheless ‘Q1’s scribe
obliterated fewer authorial characteristics than F’s’. Accordingly, in their
Oxford Complete Works, Wells and Taylor elected to follow Ridley in taking
Q1 as ‘the basic copy-text’, while ‘graft[ing] on to it passages found only in
F’ and observing what they took to be Shakespeare’s subsequent revisions
by ‘follow[ing] F in all readings which make acceptable sense’ (TC,
pp. 477–8). Taylor himself went on to reﬁne this position by proposing,
chieﬂy on the basis of F’s expurgated oaths and profanities, that F must
derive (via a literary transcript) from a late prompt-book—thus putting it
at up to three removes from the revised authorial manuscript from which
its authority derived.
   Nevertheless, while the effect of textual criticism since Ridley has under-
mined conﬁdence in the superiority of F, it is signiﬁcant that of recent
scholarly editions only the complete Oxford has been willing to follow Rid-
ley in taking Q1 as copy-text for Othello. This is partly because Coghill’s
theatrically based arguments for authorial revision in F—especially since
their vigorous development by Ernst Hongimann (1982), John Kerrigan
(1987), and John Jones (1995)—have proved so persuasive.3 Each of these

   1
     Gary Taylor, ‘The Folio Copy for Hamlet, King Lear, and Othello’, SQ 34 (1983),
44–61.
   2
     MacD. P. Jackson, ‘Printer’s Copy for the First Folio Text of Othello: the Evi-
dence of Misreadings’, The Library, 6th ser., 9 (1987), 262–7 (p. 264).
   3
     E. A. J. Honigmann, ‘Shakespeare’s Revised Plays: King Lear and Othello’, The
Library, 6th ser., 4 (1982), 142–73; John Jones, Shakespeare at Work (Oxford, 1995);
and John Kerrigan, ‘Shakespeare as Reviser (1987)’, in On Shakespeare and Early
Modern Literature (Oxford, 2001), 3–22. Ironically, Honigmann’s own position has
subsequently shifted, so that at the end of The Texts of ‘Othello’ he concludes that, in

                                         415
                                   Appendix B

critics pays close attention to small verbal substitutions as well as to
the signiﬁcant additions in F, and concludes that, while some variants
illustrate nothing more than the seemingly pointless tinkering to which
writers are prone when revisiting their texts, much of the detail shows the
dramatist as an intensely purposive reviser, ‘visibly busier’, in Kerrigan’s
estimate, ‘than everywhere else except Q and F King Lear’ (p. 16). None
of the three, however, develops convincing new textual reasons for believ-
ing in Coghill’s hypothesis; and their arguments remain overwhelmingly
aesthetic. With great subtlety, Kerrigan seeks to uncover a Shakespeare
‘work[ing] along fault lines in the story, ambiguating afresh points at
which the audience’s sympathy seems too readily assured’ (p. 11). But this
is only another way of registering the difﬁculty of discerning a single con-
trolling intention behind supposed ‘revisions’ that often seem to pull in
different directions; and one reason for the controversial status of F and Q
Othello is the problem of constructing an explanation that will account for
all the divergences between two texts, each of which has strong claims to
authority. For this reason the most recent New Cambridge editor, Norman
Sanders, adopts an even more eclectic practice than most of his predeces-
sors, basing his text on a thorough conﬂation of Q1 and F in which ‘each
pair of variants [is treated] as a separate entity’ (pp. 203–6). Sanders
believes that Q and F must ‘reﬂect two stages of composition for both of
which Shakespeare himself was responsible’, with the F-only passages
representing ‘Shakespeare’s ampliﬁcation of his own text’; but he con-
cludes that while each text is ‘superior to the other in many respects’,
each—as a result of the carelessness of scribes and compositors in the case
of Q1, and of both compositorial carelessness and editorial sophistication
in the case of F—is also defective.
   A similar view of the relative authority of Q and F underlies Ernst
Honigmann’s Arden edition; but it is based on a rather different assess-
ment of the probable relationship between the two. In his extended study
of the two texts, Honigmann ﬁnds himself having to discard the theory of
revision of which he was once a strong proponent. Whilst clinging to the
belief that ‘Q and F reﬂect two authorial strains in some shorter passages’,
Honigmann now thinks that Q and F ‘are examples of textual instability,
not of large scale revision’, with F offering at best a scattering of small
alterations that represent the author’s ‘second thoughts’ (Texts, pp. 21,
144). However, Coghill’s argument for regarding the longest and most
important of the F-only passages as an authorial ‘addition’ is unsustain-
able; for it seems inconceivable that Shakespeare would have written

view of the apparent scribal sophistication in F, Q should probably be chosen as the
‘parent text’—only to excuse his own Arden from that imperative by invoking
St Augustine’s ‘Let me live chaste, Lord! but not yet’ (p. 146). The new Variorum,
however, will apparently follow his prescription.

                                       416
                                   Appendix B

Desdemona’s lines about Barbary and her ‘Song of Willow’ (4.3.24–31)
unless he had intended the song itself to be sung;1 and if the song was
excised from Q, then it seems likely that the same must be true of the other
substantial F ‘additions’. Indeed, there are signs of even more inexpert
cutting elsewhere: for example, Q’s omission of sixteen lines from Roderi-
go’s speech describing Desdemona’s elopement (1.1.120–36) is almost cer-
tainly a cut, since Brabantio is made to refer back to it at ll. 162–6. The
probability of cutting is further increased by the fact that most of the
relevant passages in Q exhibit metrical disturbance, suggesting that rather
hasty patching was involved.2
   However, these excisions are insufﬁcient to reduce the play’s running
time to any great extent; and since Q, with its incomplete and sometimes
rather literary stage directions, lacks what are usually regarded as con-
vincing marks of prompt-book origins, Honigmann argues that its cuts are
unlikely to be theatrical in origin. Instead, he concludes that the deﬁcien-
cies of its text are best explained by the history of its transmission. Like
Sanders, he concludes that Q must derive from Shakespeare’s earliest holo-
graph—his so-called ‘foul papers’. This will have been a messy, much
overwritten, and sometimes illegible manuscript inviting all kinds of mis-
reading and misconstruction—not least where it may have been subject to
revision or marked for cutting. But the printer did not have access to this
manuscript at ﬁrst hand; for Q, as a succession of scholars from Greg
onwards have argued, bears a number of marks of scribal intervention—
notably the frequent use of the un-Shakespearian abbreviations ’em, ha’,
and tho’. Thus Shakespeare’s manuscript was exposed to two kinds of cor-
ruption: ﬁrst as it was copied by ‘one or more scribes who misread Shake-
speare’s hand repeatedly’, and then as ‘one or more compositors
manhandled the [resulting] text in other ways’.3 However, given that some


  1
     John Jowett, reviewing Honigmann’s book in SS 50 (1997), 281–4, argues that
‘[Q’s] dash after “that Song to night / Will not goe from my minde” is authorial
shorthand for “She sings” ’ (p. 281), but offers no corroborating examples.
   2
     Honigmann, Texts, pp. 10–14.
   3
     Ibid, p. 49. In a long and thoughtful review of Honigmann’s book, MacDonald
P. Jackson provides supporting evidence for the likelihood that two different scribes
(and perhaps more than one compositor) worked on the text that became Q (Shake-
speare Studies, 26 (1998), 364–72; p. 367). By contrast, Pervez Rizvi, while agreeing
that ‘most F-only passsages are much better explained as cuts than as additions’,
argues, not entirely convincingly, that ‘it is F which represents a transcript of foul
papers . . . [while] Q represents a transcript of Shakespeare’s fair copy, with cuts,
revision of many words and phrases and the elimination of false starts’ (‘Evidence of
Revision in Othello’, N&Q ns 45 (1998), 338–43; p. 343). Unfortunately, Rizvi’s the-
sis depends in part on the improbable notion that Shakespeare himself was the
reviser responsible for the somewhat clumsy cuts in Q, and upon some rather
strained arguments for the superiority of a number of doubtful readings in Q.

                                        417
                                   Appendix B

of the longer omissions from Q are clearly deliberate and systematic,1 the
printer’s copy may have been marked up for cutting ‘by someone asked to
shorten the play’; but ‘either the printer overlooked some of the intended
cancellations, or, more probably, the person marking the cuts made a
start, saw he was damaging the play and gave up in disgust’.2 In the case
of some of the more arbitrary-seeming omissions, however, Honigmann
guesses that the compositors may simply have decided to ‘save themselves
time and trouble by omitting bits of text’.3 Because Q was set by formes,4
this was especially likely to happen when the compositor, as he
approached the bottom of a page, found himself running out of space, and
could not resolve the difﬁculty (as he often did) by converting verse to
prose. By the same token, Honigmann conjectures, the compositor might
even have inserted lines of his own when he found himself with excess
space at the end of a page.
   If Honigmann’s account of its transmission points to the unreliability of
Q, the narrative he constructs for F renders that text equally suspect. He
argues that this too must derive from a non-theatrical manuscript—
probably Shakespeare’s own fair copy of the play, not extensively revised,
but incorporating some authorial second thoughts in its minor variants.
Such a manuscript would have been generally more legible than the foul
papers, but still liable to some misreading because of obscurities in Shake-
speare’s handwriting, which Honigmann suspects deteriorated over the
years. But the most conspicuous deﬁciency of F lies in the fact that it has
been stripped of the oaths and profanities that litter the Q text, and that are
particularly characteristic of Iago’s speech. It has generally been supposed
that they were purged in response to the 1606 Act to Restrain Abuses of
Players. Since the Act sought to control only the uttering of oaths in pub-
lic performances and did not extend to published material, such expurga-
tion must either have been part of a revision aimed at a revival of the play,
or derive from a suitably cleaned-up prompt-book. With signiﬁcant revi-
sion now an unlikely possibility, we seem to be left with the latter explana-
tion; and indeed Gary Taylor has insisted that in default of strong
counter-evidence, we should assume that all heavily expurgated Folio texts
  1
     For example, whoever removed Desdemona’s Willow Song from 4.3 was careful
to cut Emilia’s plangent recollection of it at 5.2.245–7.
   2
     Honigmann, Texts, p. 13.
   3
     Ibid, p. 49.
   4
     Honigmann, who once thought that Q had been set by three different composi-
tors, now edges towards Charlton Hinman’s position (in the introduction to his 1975
facsimile of Q) that Q was set by formes, apparently using only a single set of cases;
but Honigmann is understandably puzzled as to why setting by formes would be
employed, if not to allow simultaneous work on the text by more than one compos-
itor; and, where Hinman thought that his evidence argued for a single compositor,
Honigmann (pp. 45–6) continues to think that more than one compositor may have
been involved—a view supported by Jackson in his review (366–7).

                                        418
                                  Appendix B

must derive from late prompt-books.1 No mere scribe, he believes, would
take it on himself to purge the text of profanity, since that would amount
to an interference with the author’s meaning. However, since the provi-
sions of the 1606 Act were conﬁned to explicit blasphemy, they can hardly
have been responsible for F’s removal of such mild expletives as ‘tush’, ‘by
this hand’, and ‘by my troth’; nor would they explain the strange incon-
sistency whereby F typically replaces Q’s ‘God’ with ‘heaven’, whilst
frequently replacing ‘heaven’ itself with even weaker exclamations.
Moreover, Taylor’s argument is further weakened by the fact that F, with
its scanty stage directions, looks even less like a theatrically derived text
than Q.
   In fact, as Honigmann shows, it was by no means uncommon for expur-
gation to occur in manuscript transcriptions that were never intended for
theatrical use (pp. 77–81); and Barbara Mowat has pointed out that such
alteration could sometimes be authorial (as in the case of Jonson’s 1616
Works), or even editorial—as in the case of Q2 Othello, which accepts F’s
replacements for many of Q1’s oaths, but allows others to stand, while
sometimes making different substitutions of its own.2 Honigmann, how-
ever, believes that certain oddities of spelling and punctuation in F enable
him to identify the man responsible—Ralph Crane, a scribe with strong
links to the King’s Men, whose practice elsewhere suggests that he was
well capable of signiﬁcant interference with an author’s text. Honig-
mann’s main evidence lies in F’s frequent use of ‘swibs’ (single words in
brackets)—an idiosyncrasy which he is able to show was a characteristic of
Crane’s punctuation (pp. 59–62, 161–5). Honigmann conjectures that
Crane may have been ‘a senior ﬁgure in the Folio’s editorial team’ (p. 73),
and that, since his transcript of Middleton’s A Game at Chess shows him
willing to take all sorts of liberties with the text, ‘eliminating colloqui-
alisms and profanity, changing words and omitting words, lines and
longer passages’ (p. 75), he may well have sophisticated his copy in other
ways too.
   Much of Honigmann’s argument is, of course, highly speculative, lay-
ing him open to criticism not simply on points of detail, but to attack by
those like Jowett who continue to advance the case for revision, and by
others like Paul Werstine who challenge the basic New Bibliographical
assumption behind Honigmann’s procedures—namely that it is an
editor’s business to recover a text as close as possible to the author’s ﬁnal
   1
     Gary Taylor, ‘’Swounds Revisited: Theatrical, Editorial, and Literary Expurga-
tion’, in Gary Taylor and John Jowett, Shakespeare Reshaped 1606–23 (Oxford, 1993),
pp. 51–106.
   2
     Barbara Mowat, ‘Q2 Othello and the 1606 “Acte to restraine Abuses of
Players” ’, forthcoming in Varianten–Variants–Variantes, ed. Christa Jansohn and
Bodo Plachta, Internationales Jahrbuch für Editionswissenschaften, 22 (Tübingen,
2005).

                                       419
                                Appendix B

intention.1 Honigmann’s pessimistic conclusions about the dependability
of F depend partly on the supposition that a signiﬁcant number of its
errors resulted from scribal misreading of an authorial manuscript. But
MacDonald Jackson has shown that ‘a disproportionate number of F’s
most clearly identiﬁable misreadings’ (including a majority of those
involving confusion of ﬁnal s, which Honigmann attributes to Shake-
speare’s scrawled endings) fall within the stints of the inexperienced and
often careless Compositor E (see ‘Copy’ and ‘Texts review’). This, of course,
is strong evidence for believing that the copy for F must have been manu-
script and not (as Alice Walker believed) an annotated version of Q; but, if
the printer received a text much freer of scribal errors than Honigmann
imagines, and if the scribe’s transcript was as clean and legible as one
would expect of a fair copy, it means that the possibility of invisible cor-
ruption in other F readings is also much reduced.
   Jackson is similarly uneasy about Honigmann’s attempt to account for
errors that are common to Q and F by proposing that Crane had available
a copy of Q which he occasionally consulted when faced by obscurities in
the manuscript. This in itself is not improbable; but Jackson ﬁnds it hard to
believe that, if that were the case, Crane would ‘so often prefer his own
nonsensical misreading of Shakespeare’s hand to the meaningful Shake-
spearian reading . . . in Q’ (‘Texts review’, p. 369). One could, of course,
reverse the question and ask why, if his copy were as difﬁcult to decipher as
Honigmann argues, Crane would not have availed himself of the readily
available and relatively inexpensive printed text? The answer must pre-
sumably be that Crane had conﬁdence in his text and in his own ability to
make sense of it—however odd some of the results may seem to us. How
then are the common errors to be explained? Walton’s belief that they are
few enough to have been generated by accident may be well founded; but
his case (Jackson argues) is ultimately sustainable only if we assume that F
and Q derive from a single authorial archetype. This is because of another
perplexing piece of evidence cited by Walker: namely the distribution of -t
and -’d/-ed endings in F and Q. Although all Shakespeare texts make arbi-
trary use of both forms, quarto texts show a preference for -t where it is
phonetically appropriate, whereas the Folio has a marked tendency to sub-
stitute modernizing -d endings. These preferences are clear in the two Oth-
ello texts: F has approximately half Q’s number of -t endings, but the fact
each of them is anticipated in the earlier text is difﬁcult to explain as pure
coincidence. Walton accordingly argued that the -t endings in F, though
some had been changed in the process of transmission, were reproduced
from a common Shakespearian original. Jackson rightly points out that
the pattern is difﬁcult to reconcile with Honigmann’s idea that Q and F
  1
    See Jowett (above, p. 421 n. 1) and Paul Werstine, review of The Texts of
‘Othello’ and Shakespearian Revision, SQ 51 (2000), 240–4.

                                    420
                                    Appendix B

derive from two different Shakespearian manuscripts, given the notorious
irregularity of the poet’s spelling (pp. 370–1); yet the distribution of these
endings through the F text means that they can hardly be accounted for
either by the idea that Crane made occasional use of Q.
   Whatever the weaknesses of Honigmann’s case, his repudiation of the
revision theory seems well founded; and his arguments against it have
received powerful support from Scott McMillin’s introduction to his edition
of the Quarto. McMillin, however, subscribes to an entirely different expla-
nation for the peculiarities of Q, reverting to the idea that it is, after all, a
theatre-derived text. His arguments are, in many respects, persuasive; and
crucial to them is the evidence of cutting. Coghill argued that Q’s omis-
sions were too few to be of any practical value, since he calculated they
would reduce the play’s running-time of nearly three hours by a mere
eight minutes (pp. 177–9). But this is hardly decisive: cutting need not be
aimed at a radical reduction in running time, but can be made for a whole
variety of practical reasons—some of which may be quite local to the
scenes in which they occur;1 and it is instructive that in the 1997 National
Theatre production, for example, the director, Sam Mendes, chose to
excise no more than 170 lines—coincidentally almost exactly the same
amount of material as seems to have been cut from Q.2 McMillin, noting
the heavy concentration of cuts in Act 4,3 argues that Q bears every sign
   1
     Chambers, for example, suggested that the Willow Song might have been cut
simply because at some point the voice of the boy playing Desdemona had broken,
making it impossible for him to perform it (ii. 261).
   2
     At the RSC in 1985, Terry Hands chose to cut only about a hundred lines; yet
the performance struck Michael Ratcliffe as ‘quite short’ (Observer, 29 Sept. 1985).
While Coghill’s estimate of an eight-minute saving for the Q omissions is conserva-
tive, given that they included the Willow Song, it is probably about right for
Mendes’s cuts, which did not. Andrew Gurr’s arguments tend to support Honig-
mann’s belief that the Q cuts are too limited to produce a version ‘that was ever per-
formed’ (Honigmann, Texts, p. 13). Gurr believes that the evidence of surviving
‘minimal texts’ indicates that plays were normally cut to ﬁt something close to the
‘two hours’ trafﬁc of the stage’ referred to in the Romeo and Juliet prologue, and cor-
roborated by a number of contemporary claims (Gurr, pp. 81–2). Whatever one
might think about the practice of dramatists like Jonson and Webster, anxious
about the literary status of their ‘poems’, Gurr’s thesis fails to explain why a play-
wright as experienced as Shakespeare, himself an actor, and apparently uncon-
cerned with publication of his plays, would routinely squander his energies
producing texts that were much too long for ordinary performance. More recently,
however, Lukas Erne has proposed that Shakespeare typically thought in terms of
two versions of his plays—a longer ‘literary’ version designed for reading, and a
shorter ‘theatrical’ text whose extensive cuts were designed to ﬁt it to the customary
‘two hours trafﬁc of the stage’. Arguing that ‘at 3,055 lines Q1 Othello is still sub-
stantially too long to have been performed in its entirety’, he suggests that it was set
up from a transcript of ‘an only partly abridged’ text, not yet fully prepared for per-
formance—Shakespeare as Literary Dramatist (Cambridge, 2003), pp. 183–4.
   3
     According to McMillin’s calculations, nearly 50 per cent of the cuts are from
Act 4, and nearly 67 per cent from Acts 4 and 5 together. Perhaps signiﬁcantly,

                                         421
                                    Appendix B

of tactical pruning, aimed at ensuring that the pace of the action was
maintained at key points in the play, rightly pointing out even ‘eight min-
utes saved in the right place can . . . help’ (p. 13). Coghill maintained that
the supposed cuts, involving as they did some of the play’s most com-
pelling set-pieces, were simply too ‘stupid’ and ‘destructive’ to be credible.
But (as even Honigmann felt bound to protest) stupid cutting is by no
means unheard of in the theatre.1 Moreover, one might ask: destructive to
what, exactly? Coghill thought it inconceivable that anyone would have
decided to remove such an exceptional coup de théâtre as the Willow Song;
but in nineteenth-century productions it was common to do so, and the
reason is obvious: however effective Act 4, Scene 3 may be, considered
purely on its own theatrical and poetic merits, it does little or nothing after
the ﬁrst ten lines to advance the plot—and this at a point where some
directors might feel that the play’s drive towards its tragic catastrophe can-
not be allowed to slacken.
   Thus the case for regarding the F-only passages missing from Q as theatri-
cally-based cuts begins to appear, by comparison with Honigmann’s rather
strained conjectures, much more plausible. But if this points towards a play-
house origin for Walkley’s copy, is it possible to account for the other pecu-
liarities of Q in the same way? McMillin thinks that it is. Once the possibility
of signiﬁcant revision is discarded, the greatest problem for any editor is to
explain the innumerable small variations between the two texts.They are far
too numerous to be plausibly blamed on a scribe or compositor; and, in the
absence of more serious revision, the likelihood that they represent the
author’s ﬁrst thoughts is signiﬁcantly diminished. In some few variants Q
seems superior to F, in many more F is clearly superior, whilst in a very sub-
stantial number of cases the alternative readings seem (at least as far as
meaning is concerned) equally viable. This would be consistent with autho-
rial ﬁddling, except that in many instances the Q version is marked by dis-
turbance in the verse that (unless we think that Shakespeare was an
incompetent metrical craftsman) suggests that corruption may be involved
—or perhaps even revision by some other hand.2 Moreover, it seems telling
more than half are excised from the parts of Desdemona (45 lines) and Emilia (36
lines), suggesting that the boy actors concerned may also have been inadequate to
the demands of their parts, especially in the Willow Scene (McMillin, p. 9).
    1
      Texts, p. 10. Several critics of the 1930 Robeson/Ashcroft Othello, for example,
complained of the insensitive abbreviation of the text; whilst James Agate, review-
ing Michael Horme’s heavily pruned production at the Arts Theatre Club in 1931
(Sunday Times, 8 Nov. 1931), declared that most of the cutting ‘was merely foolish’:
it included Othello’s demented ‘I had been happy . . . nothing known’ (3.3.347–9),
the resonant closing lines of the temptation scene ‘Damn her, lewd minx . . . your
own for ever’ (3.3.475–9), as well as most of Iago’s reﬂections on his own motives,
‘That Cassio loves her’ (2.1.277–303).
    2
      For evidence that ‘complex revision’ of this sort is not necessarily authorial (as
was once assumed) see Rasmussen, pp. 452–3.

                                         422
                                 Appendix B

that a number of the Q variants can be explained as the result of mishearing.
Aural confusion of this sort is often attributed to piracy by an unscrupulous
publisher—such as may account for the existence of the so-called ‘bad quar-
tos’ of plays such as Romeo and Juliet, Henry V, and Hamlet. Copy in such
cases, it is supposed, would have been secured either by shorthand tran-
scription during a performance, or through the memorial efforts of actors
disloyal to the company’s interests. Piracy hardly seems a probable explana-
tion in this case, however; for, not only does Q lack the gross corruptions
normally associated with what the Folio editors called ‘stolen and surrepti-
tious copies’, but (as we have seen) Walkley seems to have been entirely suc-
cessful in establishing and sustaining his claim to ownership of the play,
even after the publication of F.
   If the peculiarities of Q are attributable neither to sharp practice on
Walkley’s part, nor to scribal or compositorial intervention, nor to Q’s
preservation of an early authorial version, then it is logical to turn to
the theatre for an explanation. Following the propositions advanced by
Andrew Gurr, McMillin thinks that two kinds of manuscript would have
been available in the theatre: a ‘minimal’ script embodying the text as cur-
rently performed, including cuts and other alterations made in the course
of production; and a ‘maximal’ script, the company’s precious ‘allowed
book’, a full-text version, typically in the dramatist’s own hand, bearing
the licence of the Revels ofﬁce (Gurr, p. 70).
   McMillin’s analysis of Q leads him to believe that its origins must lie in a
‘minimal’ script, prepared for a later revival of the play, and assembled (in
whole or in part) by dictation from the actors, after they had mastered
their parts. Such a transcription might have become necessary if the
players’ working copy had been lost or damaged in some way—especially
if (as McMillin conjectures) the company’s master copy were in the Revels
ofﬁce awaiting re-licensing. McMillin thinks that such ‘minimal’ copies
would have been made quite frequently in the life of a play as popular as
Othello (Gurr, p. 42), so that Walkley’s copy could have been either a the-
atrical playbook, or a scribal transcript—either one made for a private
patron, or one commissioned speciﬁcally for the printing shop. Such an
origin would help to account for most of the variants in Q, because a
manuscript compiled in this way would probably include, as well as the-
atrical cuts and other changes deliberately made in the course of
rehearsal, actors’ interpolations (including a signiﬁcant number of extra-
metrical ‘o, o, o’ exclamations), substitutions, accidental omissions, and
aural errors made by the scribe in the course of dictation.
   McMillin rebuts the usual case against a theatrical provenance for the Q
copy, by appealing to evidence from surviving authorial and playhouse
manuscripts which suggest that the New Bibliography’s long-accepted dis-
tinction between the characteristics of foul-papers and ‘prompt-books’ is

                                     423
                                   Appendix B

no longer sustainable. Indeed, it might be better to abandon the hallowed
term ‘prompt-book’ altogether, in favour of ‘playscript’, or Andrew Gurr’s
‘minimal text’—since the idea that the book-holder acted as a ‘prompt’ in
the modern fashion is almost certainly anachronistic. According to Gurr,
experience at the newly rebuilt Bankside Globe suggests that the physical
structure of the Elizabethan stage and tiring-house would have made
prompting impossible; and, signiﬁcantly, the markings in surviving play-
house copies seem concerned only with backstage business, such as noises
off and cueing entrances.1 It has generally been supposed that vague or
inaccurate stage directions are incompatible with playhouse copy: accord-
ing to this theory, directions like ‘Exit two or three’ (1.3.121.1), or ‘Enter
Desdemona . . . and the rest’ (1.3.170.1) would necessarily have been made
more precise in a prompt-book, whilst a detail like the mistaken entry of
Desdemona at 1.3.48.1 would certainly have been corrected. But it is con-
ceivable, as McMillin argues, that a ‘plot’ hanging backstage was more
important than the prompt-book as a device for regulating entrances. For
all of these reasons, a less than perfect text might have been quite adequate
to the book-holder’s purposes (p. 14). Thus he concludes that, so far from
reﬂecting an authorial manuscript or even a scribal transcript of such an
original, Q ‘comes from a theatre-script on which Shakespeare may never
have left a mark of his own’—an ‘acted version of the play’ that was pre-
served in ‘a prompt book legitimately prepared once the actors [had] mem-
orized their roles’ (pp. 3, 7–8).
   The strongest evidence that dictation has played a part in the transmis-
sion of a text consists of errors that appear to be the result of mishearing.
Probable examples of aural confusion cited by Honigmann and McMillin
include: ‘Weele’ for ‘Will’ at 1.2.17; ‘Ha, with who’ for ‘Ha[ve] with you’
(1.2.53); ‘mindes of sulphure’ for ‘mines of sulphur’ at 3.3.331; and to
these one can add ‘an excellent courtesy’ for ‘and excellent courtesy’
(2.1.172); ‘slow unmoving’ for ‘slow and moving’ (4.2.55); and possibly
‘offence’ for ‘of sense’ (2.3.258). It is hardly an overwhelming list; and one
might expect to ﬁnd more numerous instances of apparent mishearing in
an aurally constructed text. Moreover, it is not impossible, as Honigmann
points out, for errors of this kind to be generated by a kind of internal ‘mis-
hearing’ on the part of a tired compositor.2 However, McMillin strength-
ens his case by drawing attention to a number of passages in which
  1
     See Gurr, pp. 70–3, and his introduction to The First Quarto of Henry V, pp. 2–4.
The anachronistic implications of the term ‘prompt-book’ are also discussed by
Werstine, ‘ “Foul Papers” and “Bad” Quartos’, pp. 68–9, and William B. Long, ‘ “A
bed for woodstock”: A Warning for the Unwary’, Medieval and Renaissance Drama in
England, 2 (1985), 91–118 (esp. p. 93).
   2
     Such mishearing, as McMillin concedes, might even have been of a literal kind,
if (as seems quite possible) seventeenth-century compositors read their copy aloud
(p. 33).

                                        424
                                   Appendix B

confusions of syntax and punctuation seem to have resulted from aural
mistakes (pp. 33–5); and goes on to argue (pp. 37–41) that much of the
mislineation in Q—usually attributed to inexpert casting-off, or to lack of
clarity in the manuscript—might well have been similarly produced. Line
endings can be difﬁcult even for a practised ear to pick, and are especially
so in verse with a good deal of enjambement. Furthermore, in many
instances the mislineation involves the appearance of half-lines in the
middle of long speeches; and McMillin suggests (pp. 38–41) that these are
likely to reﬂect the scribe’s effort to anticipate the shared line that (reﬂect-
ing an increasingly well-established convention) ends most speeches in Q.
   There are also a number of passages in which Q prints verse as prose, or
vice versa. Sometimes this can be explained as a compositorial device to
cover up faulty casting-off on a page which had proved to be either too
crowded or too sparse; but this will not explain Q’s printing as prose Iago’s
blank verse at 4.1.41–4. Even more telling is the passage at 2.3.253–6,
where Q converts Cassio’s prose lament to verse, despite the fact that on
this page (F2v) the compositor seems to have been trying to save space:
              Reputation, reputation, I ha lost my reputation:
              I ha lost the immortal part sir of my selfe,
              And what remaines is beastiall, my reputation,
              Iago, my reputation.
McMillin attributes this to the scribe’s having ‘missed the change of mode’
and so feeling his way for imaginary pentameters (‘Mystery’, p. 418). But
the listening ear may not have been entirely at fault here: the excision of
F’s third ‘reputation’ and following ‘O’ in the ﬁrst line, and the insertion of
‘sir’ in the second, sound very much like adjustments an actor might make
when taking advantage of the pentameter beat for mnemonic purposes.1
   If, then, there are enough signs of possible actors’ alterations and aural
confusion on the part of a scribe to make it seem likely that dictation played
some part in the transmission of the earlier text, how is it possible to
account for the fact that Q is nevertheless a demonstrably better text than
the ‘stolen and surreptitious’ playscripts generally thought to have been
assembled by this method? Part of the answer may be, as McMillin sug-
gests, that in the case of a transcription carried out for company purposes
the entire cast will have been involved, rather than one or two maverick
actors. But is it conceivable that the scribe might also have had access to a
manuscript with which he could piece out the imperfections of what the
actors dictated? If that were so, it is difﬁcult to see why dictation would
have been necessary in the ﬁrst place. There was, however, one kind of
theatrical manuscript that could readily have been called on when a new

                        1
                            Cf. also Commentary, 1.3.249.

                                       425
                                   Appendix B

copy of the play was required, but which would have been inconvenient as
a source of direct transcription—namely an assemblage of the ‘parts’ into
which the text had to be divided when the play was ﬁrst cast.1 Each ‘part’
consisted of a roll of paper (from which the modern term ‘role’ derives) on
which were written out all of the character’s speeches, together with the
necessary cue lines. In the Elizabethan repertory system such ‘parts’
would presumably have belonged to the actors to whom they were ﬁrst
assigned, and (when they retired, left the company, or grew too old for a
particular role) would have been passed on to their successors.2 By their
nature, individual ‘parts’ could not easily be reassembled into a version of
the script coherent enough for simple copying, but they would have been
available for consultation at any point where the actors’ memories were
uncertain, or where the scribe might have felt the need to conﬁrm the
accuracy of his dictated text. A text produced in this fashion, though still
liable to corruption from the actors’ imperfect memories, would have
made up a generally reliable version of the tragedy, and one that (in the
absence of any true equivalent to the modern prompter with his carefully
annotated script) was likely to be closer to the play-as-performed than any-
thing the book-keeper would need to possess. Produced originally by care-
ful scribal transcription from the fair copy that served as the players’
master-text, ‘parts’ would presumably have been subject to alteration or
revision and marked up for cutting during the process of rehearsal and
performance in successive stagings of the play. In the case of the King’s
Men, this process might well have involved the dramatist’s second
thoughts, but could also have included interpolations and changes made
by the actors themselves.
   The notion that printing-house copy might have originated in this way
is not entirely fanciful, for it ﬁts the process that Humphrey Moseley had in
mind when, in his prefatory epistle for the 1647 folio of Beaumont and
Fletcher, he compared the versions in his collection with others in circula-
tion: ‘When these comedies and tragedies were presented on the stage, the
actors omitted some scenes and passages (with the author’s consent) as
occasion led them; and when private friends desired a copy, they then (and
justly too) transcribed what they acted.’3 It seems entirely possible, then,
that Q represents just such a transcription of ‘what they acted’; and, given


  1
     McMillin himself does not consider the possibility that the ‘parts’ themselves
might have been made available to the scribe, but there seems no reason in principle
why this should not have been done—especially when the actors had good reason
to require as accurate a transcript as possible.
   2
     For a useful discussion of ‘parts’ and other theatre scripts, see McMillin,
‘Mystery’, pp. 409–12.
   3 ‘The Stationer to the Reader’, in Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, Comedies

and Tragedies (1647), sig. A4.

                                       426
                                 Appendix B

that the King’s Men had good reasons to resist publication of any Shake-
speare play in 1622, Walkley is likely to have acquired his transcript from
one of those ‘private friends’ to whom Moseley refers. The large number of
contractions suggested to Greg that this manuscript was compiled at a
relatively late date—probably after Shakespeare’s death in 1616—
although this conjecture sits a little uneasily with the text’s unexpurgated
oaths and asseverations which might point to a date prior to the Act to
Restrain Abuses in 1606.
   Clearly the best evidence for Q’s supposed playhouse origins (apart from
the various kinds of scribal error detected by McMillin) is to be found in
textual variants that are readily explained as actors’ interpolations, substi-
tutions, or omissions—whether deliberate or accidental. The problem here
lies in the danger of circularity, since any theory of Q’s provenance is itself
partly designed to account for the existence of such variants. What, from
the perspective of an editor committed to a theory like McMillin’s, will look
like an actor’s substitution in Q, can equally be explained as the product of
authorial ﬁddling; alternatively, an editor persuaded by Honigmann’s
ideas about Crane’s practice might wish to explain the F reading as a result
of ‘improvement’ by an interfering scribe. Inevitably the case for favouring
one explanation or the other must usually depend on aesthetic—and
therefore subjective—criteria, so that not all of McMillin’s examples will
seem equally persuasive to every reader. However, there are a number of
variants that it is difﬁcult to explain in any other way.
   At 3.3.148–54, for example, F reads:

                                            I do beseech you,
              Though I perchance am vicious in my guesse
              (As I confesse it is my Natures plague
              To spy into Abuses, and of my iealousie
              Shapes faults that are not) that your wisedome,
              From one, that so imperfectly conceits,
              Would take no notice . . .

whereas Q prints:

                                            I doe beseech you,
               Though I perchance am vicious in my ghesse,
               As I confesse it is my natures plague,
               To spy into abuses, and oft my iealousie
               Shapes faults that are not, I intreate you then,
               From one that so imperfectly coniects,
               You’d take no notice . . .

It is difﬁcult to imagine the author deliberately complicating Iago’s already
knotty syntax to produce the F reading; but Q’s ‘I intreate you then’,
                                     427
                                 Appendix B

which effectively begins the sentence anew, reads like exactly the kind of
substitution an actor (failing to see how Iago’s syntax functions as deliber-
ate mystiﬁcation) might choose when attempting to make his meaning
clear to the audience. By the same token at 2.1.65, Q’s rather lame ‘Does
bear all excellency’ seems like an easy actor’s substitution for Cassio’s
characteristically ﬂowery hyperbole in F—‘Does tire the ingener’; at
3.3.321 Q’s ‘Be not you known on’t’ looks like a probable substitution for
F’s unusual and somewhat antiquated phrasing ‘Be not acknown on’t’;
‘reputation’ at 1.3.272 and ‘catch you’ at 2.1.167 seem likely to be actors’
replacements for F’s more striking ‘estimation’ and ‘give [i.e. gyve] thee’.
The substitution of the conventional honoriﬁc ‘his Worship’ at 1.1.32 for
Iago’s witty coinage ‘his Moorship’ is just the kind of memorial slip an
actor might easily make. In addition, the large number of casual variants
and small omissions in extended prose passages—notably in Iago’s
speeches at 2.1.208–75—may reﬂect actors’ difﬁculties in accurately
mastering extended speeches without the mnemonic advantages of verse.
Finally, while the stage directions in Q may not be as full and accurate as
normally expected of so-called ‘prompt-books’, there are at least two
instances (3.4.93, 102 and 4.2.86, 89) where Q seems to anticipate actors’
entries in the fashion associated with such texts. This is important because
the proper organization of entrances was the one aspect of performance
over which the book-keeper could be expected to exercise some control.
   Whilst the theory that Q is (at least in part) a memorially reconstructed
text helps to account for the widely accepted superiority of a high propor-
tion of F variants, it will not explain all the differences between the two—
especially in those cases where the Q reading seems demonstrably better.
Some of these can be ascribed to simple error—to misreading or careless-
ness on the part of the F scribe or compositor, or to problems with illegible
copy. There are, however, a number of variants that are not so easily
explained away. At 1.3.342, for example, Q’s acerb (a rare word, otherwise
unrecorded before 1657) not only seems like a characteristically vivid
Shakespearian coinage, but apparently derives from a passage in the
source, where the Moor’s love for Desdemona is described as turning to bit-
terest hate (acerbissimo odio). It must, therefore, be authorial; and it is difﬁ-
cult to imagine why Shakespeare would ever have chosen to substitute F’s
more pedestrian bitter. The latter could, however, be explained as a scribal
or compositorial sophistication. The same might apply to F’s substitution
of sorry for sullen at 3.4.49. As soon as such possibilities are admitted, then
the integrity of F is put in question. This is especially so in light of the fact
that someone (not necessarily Shakespeare) was responsible for purging
the F version of oaths and profanities—a decision that has signiﬁcant dra-
matic consequences, since in Q profanity is such an important feature of
Iago’s bilious idiolect. As we saw, this bowdlerizing has generally been

                                      428
                                   Appendix B

explained as a response to the 1606 Act to Restrain Abuses; but since the
Act applied to performed rather than to printed material, it is difﬁcult to
explain why the same process was not applied to Q, the text that bears the
clearest signs of playhouse origins—unless (despite its late date) it derives
from a very early playscript.1 This would seem to support Honigmann’s
argument that the purge was an editorial decision taken by the scribe
responsible for the transcript behind F.
   If Honigmann is right in identifying this man as Ralph Crane, then the
scribe was someone capable of taking considerable liberties with the texts
he was transcribing.2 It is not necessary, however, to subscribe to Honig-
mann’s complex and sometimes rather tenuous arguments about Crane to
admit the possibility of non-authorial interference in F; and this might
have worrying implications for the status of some passages that are often
thought to reﬂect authorial ‘second thoughts’ in the later text. There are,
for example, a number of passages in the F version of Act 1, Scene 3 that
depart from Q in ways that signiﬁcantly affect our understanding of Des-
demona’s character. Taken as a group, these F variants suggest sys-
tematic alteration by someone troubled at the apparent boldness of
Desdemona’s behaviour as Q represents it. At 1.3.248–9, where F has
Desdemona’s heart ‘subdued | Even to the very quality of my lord’, Q has
her talk more suggestively of his utmost pleasure. The F reading ﬁts better
with the following lines (‘I saw Othello’s visage in his mind . . .’), and it
might be tempting to account for the Q variant as a memorial vulgariza-
tion, were it not for a more elaborate discrepancy at ll. 258–9, where Oth-
ello seeks permission for Desdemona to join him in Cyprus. In Q he begs the
Senate to ‘let her will, | Haue a free way’, while in F he simply asks them to
‘Let her haue your voice’, thereby excluding the suggestions of both wilful-
ness and sexual desire in will and free. Q hardly reads like an easy actor’s
substitution, and the fact that F’s l. 258 is metrically incomplete strongly
suggests that some tampering has occurred in the later text—especially in
view of the slightly awkward way in which ‘Let her haue your voice’


   1
     It has often been argued that the presence of act divisions in Q must reﬂect its
origins in a version of the play performed after 1610, when (following their acquisi-
tion of the indoor Blackfriars theatre as a winter house) the King’s Men began to fol-
low the private theatre practice of punctuating their performances with breaks
between the acts. The supposed allusion to the heraldry of the new order of
baronets, founded in 1612, at 3.4.44–5 would be an insertion supporting a later
date. But the allusion is dependent on an unnecessary emendation of this passage;
and the act divisions, which are also to be found in all ﬁve of the Walkley–Okes
King’s Men quartos, might have been inserted by someone making a private tran-
script (as McMillin suggests)—or even by the publisher himself—to conform with
the expectations of late Jacobean readers and playgoers.
   2
     Honigmann, Texts, chaps. 6 and 7.


                                        429
                                Appendix B

repeats the syntax of Desdemona’s preceding ‘Let me go with him’ (l. 257).
On the other hand, whilst Q is metrically complete, Othello’s ‘I therefore
beg it not’ (l. 259) constitutes a rather abrupt switch of direction unless
introduced by F’s asseveration ‘Vouch with me, heaven’, so that (as the Q2
editor seems to have felt) neither version may be fully satisfactory. Other
metrical disturbances occur in F at ll. 240 and 276: in the ﬁrst of these F
again seems to soften Desdemona’s character by omitting her repetition of
Othello’s deﬁant ‘Nor I’; and in the second F’s omission of Desdemona’s
‘Tonight, my lord?’ at l. 276 (though explicable as eye-skip) appears to
belong to the same pattern, since it makes Desdemona appear more pas-
sively accepting of the men’s arrangements, and perhaps (as Honigmann
suggests) less openly concerned about losing the pleasure of her wedding
night.
   F’s failure to adjust the metre at these points could suggest (even in a
play marked by as much metrical irregularity as Othello) that someone
lacking Shakespeare’s facility with verse was responsible for the alter-
ations. Nevertheless the proximity of another small but signiﬁcant F vari-
ant at l. 159, with quite opposite implications for Desdemona’s character,
makes it unlikely that they were made by an editorializing scribe. Where
Q’s Desdemona is so moved by Othello’s stories that she gives him ‘for [his]
pains a world of sighs’, in F she overwhelms him with ‘a world of kisses’.
Since it seems improbable that Shakespeare would have described such
an extravagant expression of emotion as ‘this hint’, the most plausible
explanation is that the scribe’s manuscript had become illegible at this
point, and that ‘kisses’ represents his conjectural substitution. It is highly
unlikely that anyone responsible for the systematic moderation of Desde-
mona’s behaviour at ll. 240–57 would have arrived at such a conjecture.
Accordingly, while F is certainly not the product of wholesale revision, it
remains entirely possible that here (and elsewhere) the manuscript from
which it derived incorporated the author’s ‘second thoughts’—even if
these were often somewhat hastily executed and inserted.


Conclusion
The one conclusion we can safely draw from this protracted history of
debate is that the textual mystery of Othello is unlikely ever to be resolved
to general satisfaction. Its problems have attracted the attention of the
most distinguished minds in the pantheon of bibliographers, textual schol-
ars, and editors; yet none has succeeded in arriving at a watertight and
self-consistent theory of the copy for the two texts, and of their relation-
ship to one another. It may well be true that, as Paul Werstine has argued,
the quest is chimerical: ‘it is only our desire for New-Critical unity’, he
argues, ‘that may have caused us to . . . ﬁx the origins of the early printed
                                    430
                                   Appendix B

versions upon single agents’, when the evidence suggests that agency may
well have been ‘multiple and dispersed’. After all
these texts were open to penetration and alteration not only by Shakespeare himself
and by his fellow actors but also by multiple theatrical and extra-theatrical scriven-
ers, by theatrical annotators, adapters and revisers (who might cut or add), by cen-
sors, and by compositors and proofreaders.1

If early modern play-texts were indeed the ﬂuid, inﬁnitely variable arte-
facts suggested by much of what we know about contemporary stage prac-
tice, then the guiding star by which even the radical Oxford editors set
their compass—the author’s ‘ﬁnal intentions’—may be a ﬁction of the
modern imagination. Yet even those editors who are most sceptical about
the possibility of establishing an authoritative text of Othello, are forced,
sooner or later, to make judgements not just about the merits of individual
variants but about the relative reliability of F and Q; and, in default of con-
clusive empirical evidence, such judgements (whatever the scholarly
arguments adduced in their support) must often be, in the last analysis,
critical—that is to say idealist.2
    This edition is no different. It proceeds from the assumption that F is in
most respects the more reliable of the two texts. Whilst there can be no cer-
tainty about the nature of the manuscript copy for either Q or F, the evi-
dence in the former of cutting, memorial corruption, probable actors’
substitutions, omissions, and interpolations, together with possible aural
mistakes, is sufﬁcient to point to the likelihood of a theatrical origin—per-
haps in a scribal transcription of a text assembled, with occasional memor-
ial assistance, from actors’ parts. The transcription may well have been
made for a private patron, and obtained from him by Walkley. Act divi-
sions were probably inserted as part of the process of preparing the script
for a reading public. Of course the fact that some of the peculiarities of Q
may be theatrical in origin does not necessarily discredit its variants, since
it is quite conceivable that changes introduced in the course of production
could have included minor authorial revisions, as well as other alterations
made, as Moseley put it, ‘with the author’s consent’. Nevertheless, as
nearly all editors have agreed, F seems to offer the better reading in the
case of the great majority of substantive variants; and there are good rea-
sons for supposing that Othello was one of the texts that Heminge and Con-
dell had in mind when they claimed to be offering the best available
versions of Shakespeare’s plays ‘cured and perfect of their limbs; and all
the rest . . . as he conceived them’ (A3). The fact that F includes material

  1
     Werstine, ‘ “Foul Papers” and “Bad” Quartos’, p. 86.
  2
     Thus Werstine and Barbara Mowat chose to use F as the basis for their New Fol-
ger edition on the grounds that it is ‘the more accurate’ of the two. See Barbara A.
Mowat and Paul Werstine (eds.), Othello (New York, 1993), p. xlv.

                                        431
                                   Appendix B

that appears to have been cut from Q suggests that the printer’s manu-
script derived from the players’ ‘maximal’ script, via a scribal copy com-
missioned expressly for the purpose. Honigmann’s researches make it
likely that the scribe introduced some changes of his own, notably the pur-
gation of oaths and profanities, but there are no compelling reasons for
believing that his interventions otherwise went much beyond the usual
liberties with punctuation, spelling, and lineation. Perhaps because of the
greater technical difﬁculties involved in casting off a folio sheet, F is gener-
ally more cavalier than Q in its treatment of versiﬁcation: I have collated
186 instances of mislineation; in 33 of these neither F nor Q appears to lin-
eate correctly, suggesting confusion in the original manuscripts; Q lin-
eates correctly in 99 instances, however—twice as often as F (54).1
   We have no means of knowing whether or not the King’s Men received
(as Honigmann argues) more than one autograph manuscript from the
dramatist; but since he was a member of the company, it is entirely con-
ceivable that he might have supplied separate copies for use in the theatre
and for submission to the Revels ofﬁce. In that case, some at least of F’s
variants may have resulted from the kind of authorial ﬁddling suggested
by Honigmann in The Stability of Shakespeare’s Text. But given the possibil-
ity of authorially sanctioned changes in the course of production, and the
probable theatrical origins of Q, we cannot rule out the possibility that
each text contains variants that represent Shakespeare’s second thoughts.
Either way Honigmann’s insistence that F and Q represent a history of
‘textual instability’ rather than of systematic revision seems well founded.
However, the fact that F not only reproduces a fuller text, but is therefore
likely to be the product of a rather less problematic transmission history,
makes it appear generally the more reliable of the two. Accordingly this
edition, like the majority of its predecessors, takes F as its copy-text, cor-
recting it wherever necessary by reference to Q. Like nearly all modern edi-
tors, I have usually restored the expletives and profanities missing from F,
and have included all signiﬁcant Q-only passages, noting in the commen-
tary wherever they do not ﬁt easily into the F text. I have carefully com-
pared both texts with Q2, and have often been guided by its choices,
especially when it deliberately abandons its Q1 copy to follow F, or where it
departs from both originals. In one or two instances I have also been inﬂu-
enced by the corrections in F2. That said, any serious student of the play
should be cautioned that the text of Othello printed here (like any other—
including Q and F themselves) is to some extent a synthetic creature,
shaped by editorial judgements and aesthetic preferences that are
inevitably the product of a particular place and time. It is most unlikely to

  1
     It is probably signiﬁcant that a disproportionate number (62) of the mislin-
eations peculiar to F occur in the stints of the otherwise more careful Compositor B,
suggesting that they may well derive from the copy.

                                        432
                               Appendix B

correspond in every detail to any version of the play actually performed in
Shakespeare’s lifetime—much less to the dramatist’s ‘ﬁnal intention’
(assuming he ever arrived at such a thing). For that reason the collations
should be regarded for what they are—not as a mere scholarly accessory,
but as a reservoir of poetic and theatrical possibility.




                                   433
                                 appendix c
      GIOVANNI BATTISTA GIRALDI CINTHIO : GLI
   HECATOMMITHI THIRD DECADE, SEVENTH NOVELLA
              Translated by Bruno Ferraro

Like many collections of novelle, Giraldi’s are placed within a frame narrative,
involving a group of friends who debate a number of moral and social issues,
using stories to illustrate their arguments. The stories in this decade are linked by
their common concern with ‘the inﬁdelity of husbands and wives’.
   In the text below, passages of particular relevance to ‘Othello’ are printed in
italics, and references to the play are included in brackets where appropriate.

A Moorish Captain takes a Venetian citizen as his wife; his Ensign accuses
her of adultery to her husband; he solicits the Ensign to kill the adulterous
man; the Captain kills his wife and is accused by the Ensign. The Moor does
not confess but, given clear proof of his guilt, he is banished. And the
wicked Ensign, thinking to harm others, brings a miserable death upon
himself.

   The ladies would have felt great pity for the fate of the Florentine woman
had her adultery not made her appear worthy of the severest punishment.
They considered that the gentleman’s patience had been overly great.
They were of the opinion that it would have been very difﬁcult to ﬁnd any
other gentleman who, upon discovering his wife in such a compromising
situation, would not have killed both parties. After considering every
aspect of the affair, they decided that he had acted in the wisest possible
way. Among those who shared these opinions was Curzio, on whom all
eyes were turned since he was about to start his story: ‘I believe,’ said he,
’that neither men nor women can ever escape the passion of love since
human nature is so disposed to it that (even against our will) our souls can-
not but feel its effects. But nevertheless I think that it is in the power of a
virtuous lady, when she is overwhelmed with passion, to prefer to die
rather than tarnish herself with that shame from which women must
defend themselves if they wish to remain blameless and pure as white
ermine. And I believe that those women who, free of the sacred bond of
matrimony, offer their bodies to the delights of every man, err less than
married women who commit adultery, even if only once. But as this
woman suffered a punishment proportionate to her sin, so it sometimes
happens that a faithful, loving woman, guilty of nothing, is put to death by her
faithful husband because of the insidious plots hatched by a wicked mind or

                                        434
                                   Appendix C

because of the weakness of one who believes more than he need—as will be evi-
dent in the story which I am about to relate.

There was once in Venice a very valiant Moor who, because he was very brave
and had given proof of his courage and prudence in warfare and of his energy and
skill [1.3.48, 221–7], was dear to those lords who in rewarding great deeds sur-
pass those of all other republics in their actions. [1.1.151–2; 1.2.18] It hap-
pened that a virtuous and extraordinarily beautiful lady, called Disdemona,
drawn not by her womanly appetite but by the Moor’s mettle, fell in love with
him. [1.3.246–53, 259–63] The Moor, overcome by her beauty and noble mind,
likewise fell in love with her. So favourably did their love proceed that they were
joined in marriage, even though her family tried all they could to make her wed
somebody else. [1.2.67–8; 3.3.233–4; 4.2.125] They lived in harmony and
tranquillity while they were in Venice and never exchanged a word that was not
sweet and amorous.
   It happened that the Venetian lords made a change in the forces which
they are accustomed to maintain in Cyprus and they dispatched the Moor
as captain of those soldiers. The Moor, though ﬂattered by the honour
(since such an ofﬁce is usually given to noble, brave, and faithful men who have
had a chance to display their valour [1.3.221–7]), was rather saddened by the
prospect of having to undertake such a long and uncomfortable journey,
since he thought that Disdemona might be troubled by it. The Lady, who
had no other love in the world but the Moor and was delighted at the honour
which so noble and powerful a Republic had bestowed upon her husband
for his prowess, could not wait to see her husband set off with his aides and to
accompany him soon after [1.3.246–57]; but she was upset to see that the
Moor was worried; and as she did not know the cause of this, one day
while they were dining she said to him: ‘Why is it, Moor, that despite the
great honour which the Lords have bestowed upon you, you are so discon-
solate?’ The Moor replied to Disdemona: ‘The love which I feel for you
clouds my happiness at the honour I have received, because I envisage one
of two things happening: either I take you with me and expose you to the
perils of the sea or, to avoid such discomfort, I leave you behind in Venice.
I would feel very sad if I chose the ﬁrst alternative because I would suffer to
see you endure discomfort and be exposed to danger. I would ﬁnd the sec-
ond alternative even more unpleasant, since to be separated from you is
tantamount to death for me.’ After hearing these words, Disdemona said:
‘My husband, why do you entertain such thoughts? Why do you let your-
self be burdened by these worries? I want to follow you wherever you go,
even if it means walking through ﬁre in my chemise, rather than travelling
with you by sea in a safe and well-equipped ship, as I am about to do. If
there are going to be dangers and exhausting trials, I want to share them
with you; I should consider myself little loved by you if, in order to spare me this

                                       435
                                   Appendix C

sea voyage, you were to leave me in Venice, or if you thought that I would rather
stay safely here and not share the same dangers as you. [1.3.253–7] So I want
you to prepare yourself for the trip with all the cheerfulness beﬁtting the
rank you hold.’ The Moor then threw his arms joyfully around his wife’s
neck and said to her with an affectionate embrace: ‘May the Lord grant us
this love for ever, my dear wife.’ After a short while, having gathered his
apparel and prepared himself for the trip, he embarked upon the ship
with his wife and all his train; and having given the order to set sail, he
set off on the journey to Cyprus, aided by a very calm sea.
   In his company he had a very handsome Ensign who, however, harboured
the most wicked disposition. He was much loved by the Moor, who had no inkling
of the Ensign’s ugly character. For, although he was very wicked, he concealed
the wickedness which he harboured in his heart with lofty words and a proud
manner [1.1.61–5; 3.3.110–11] to such an extent that he appeared to
resemble a Hector or an Achilles. This vile man had also brought with him his
wife, a beautiful and virtuous young woman; because she was Italian,
she was dearly loved by the Moor’s wife and spent a good part of the day
with her.
   In the same company there was also a Corporal who was very dear to
the Moor. He often visited the Moor at home and dined with him and his
wife. [3.3.71–4, 96–102] Since the Lady knew him to be so well liked by her
husband, she gave him proofs of her greatest kindness. This was much
appreciated by the Moor. The wicked Ensign, disregarding the word he had
given his wife and the friendship, loyalty, and obligations he owed the Moor,
fell passionately in love with Disdemona [2.1.282] and put all of his efforts
into possessing her carnally; but he did not dare show his hand, fearing,
should the Moor notice anything, that he would be put to death. He tried,
in many ways and as covertly as possible, to make the Lady aware of his
love. But the Lady, who thought only of the Moor, did not heed the Ensign
or any other man. Everything he tried in order to make her fall in love
with him had as little effect as if he hadn’t tried anything at all. It then
occurred to him that she might have behaved in this way because she was in love
with the Corporal; he therefore decided to get rid of him and devoted all his efforts
to that end. [2.1.229–41, 277–8, 296–8] However, the love he felt for the
Lady changed to hatred and he concentrated all his efforts into working
out how, once the Corporal had been killed, he could—should he fail to
conquer the Lady—prevent the Moor from enjoying her favours. After
considering various wicked and treacherous plans, he decided in the end to
accuse her of adultery and to make her husband believe that the culprit was the
Corporal. [1.3.381–7] But, since he was aware of the special love that the Moor
had for his wife [2.1.279–82] and of his friendship with the Corporal, he
realized that, unless he managed to concoct a particularly cunning trick,
he wouldn’t be able to convince the Moor of either misgiving. For this

                                        436
                                 Appendix C

reason he decided to wait for the right time and place in order to put his
wicked plan into action.
   Not long afterwards the Moor stripped the Corporal of his rank for having
drawn his sword and wounded a soldier while on guard duty. [2.3] This
immensely displeased Disdemona who tried on various occasions to mend the rift
between her husband and the Corporal. [3.3.41–84; 3.4.46–8, 86–93] Where-
upon the Moor told the wicked Ensign that his wife importuned him so
much on the Corporal’s behalf that he feared that he would be compelled
to reinstate him. The depraved man, hearing this, decided to put his plan
into action and said: ‘Maybe Disdemona has a reason to look upon him so
favourably.’ [3.3.232–42] ‘Why?’ asked the Moor. ‘I do not want to come
between husband and wife,’ said the Ensign, ‘but if you keep your eyes open,
you will see for yourself.’ [3.3.200–1] Despite all the Moor’s entreaties, the
Ensign was unwilling to do anything further. Nonetheless his words remained
such a sharp thorn in the Moor’s side that he tormented his brain wondering
about their meaning and became very melancholic. [3.3.111–19, 158, 165,
246–7]
   Then one day, as his wife was trying to tone down the Moor’s anger
towards the Corporal by saying that he should not ignore his thirty years of
service and friendship for such a small fault—especially since there had
been a perfect reconciliation between the Corporal and the wounded sol-
dier—the Moor burst out into anger and said to her: ‘There must be a very
good reason, Disdemona, for you to take such a matter to heart and worry
about him: it is not as if he were your brother or a kinsman.’ The Lady
answered in a very polite and humble manner: ‘I do not want you to
become angry with me; the only reason which moves me to speak is that I
am aggrieved to see you deprived of such a good friend as (by your own
admission) the Corporal has been to you. He has not committed a grave
enough fault to deserve such hatred. But you Moors have such a hot tem-
perament that any little matter moves you to anger and vendetta.’
   Further enraged by these words, the Moor answered: ‘Anyone who does
not believe that may easily have proof of it! I shall take revenge for any
wrongs done to me until I am fully satisﬁed!’ The Lady was astounded at
these words and, observing her husband’s unprecedented fury with her,
said humbly: ‘I was prompted to speak for a good purpose; but, rather than
have you angry, I shall speak no more.’ The Moor, surprised by his wife’s
intervention in favour of the Corporal, guessed that the words uttered by
the Ensign were meant to suggest that Disdemona was in love with the
Corporal. Deeply disturbed by this realization, the Moor went to talk to the
rascal and tried to convince him to speak more openly about the matter.
[3.3.135–7] The Ensign, who was eager to bring about the Lady’s downfall, at
ﬁrst feigned not to want to say anything that might upset the Moor, but, after
pretending to have been persuaded by his entreaties, said: ‘I cannot deny that it

                                      437
                                  Appendix C

grieves me greatly to have to tell you something which will cause you enormous
distress; but since you urge me to talk, and because of the great regard I have for
your honour as my lord, I do not want to fail you or fall short of my duty to you.
[3.3.137–40, 196–9] You must, therefore, know that it is painful for your
wife to see the Corporal punished in disgrace with you, for the simple rea-
son that she takes her pleasure with him whenever he comes to your
house, as if she had already grown tired of your blackness.’ [3.3.232–7]
   These words penetrated deeply into the Moor’s heart; [3.3.261ff.] but in
order to learn more (and to ascertain, because of the suspicion already
awoken in his mind, that what the Ensign had said was true) he said with
a ﬁerce look: ‘I do not know what is holding me back from cutting out that auda-
cious tongue of yours, which has dared to utter such calumny against my wife.’
[2.3.212; 3.3.361–75] Then the Ensign replied: ‘Captain, I did not expect any
tangible reward for my loving service; but since my duty and care for your hon-
our have carried me as far as they have [3.3.120, 196–8, 463–9], I tell you that
the affair stands exactly as you have just heard. If your Lady, by pretend-
ing to love you, has so blinded your eyes that you have not seen what you
should have, that does not mean that I am not speaking the truth. The Cor-
poral himself has confessed to me, like someone whose happiness is not
complete unless he has conﬁded in someone else.’ He then added: ‘If I had
not feared your wrath, I would, when he revealed it to me, have given him the
punishment he deserved—death. [1.2.4–5] But since letting you know what
concerns you more than anyone else brings me such undeserved reward, I
wish I had kept quiet [3.3.394] so as not to have fallen into disfavour with
you.’ Then the Moor, in a most distressed voice, said ‘If you do not help me
to see with my own eyes what you have just told me, rest assured, I shall make
you realize that it would have been better for you to have been born dumb.’
[3.3.361–8] ‘When he used to come to your house, it would have been easy
to prove,’ replied the villain, ‘but now that you have driven him away—not
for the reason he deserved but for a trivial one—it will be very difﬁcult for me
[3.3.399]; for although I think that he still takes his pleasure with Disde-
mona whenever you give him a chance, he has to act much more cautiously
now that he has fallen foul of you than he had to before. [3.3.420–1] But I do
not lose hope of being able to show you what you do not want to believe.’
And with these words they parted.
   The wretched Moor, as if he had been stabbed by the very sharpest of
knives, went home, waiting for the day when the Ensign would be able to
show him the thing that would make him miserable for ever. But the
Lady’s chastity caused the accursed Ensign no less anxiety, for it did not
seem possible to ﬁnd a way to convince the Moor of the truth of what he
had falsely told him. After turning over various thoughts in his mind, the
rascal came up with a wicked new stratagem. As I have said, the Moor’s
wife frequently went to visit the Ensign’s wife and spent a great part of the

                                       438
                                 Appendix C

day with her; and because the Ensign noticed that the Lady often took with
her a handkerchief—a gift from the Moor—which was most delicately embroi-
dered in the Moorish fashion [3.3.434–6; 3.4.62–7] and much treasured by the
Lady and the Moor alike [3.3.310–12, 320–21; 3.4.21–4, 54–74; 5.2.50], he
plotted to steal it from her and set the last deceitful trap. [3.3.310–18;
5.2.224–8] He had a three-year-old daughter, who was much loved by Dis-
demona, so he took the child in his arms one day when the wretched Lady
had gone to the rascal’s house, and placed her in the arms of the Lady,
who drew her to her bosom. This deceitful scoundrel, who was very deft
with his ﬁngers, very carefully took the handkerchief out of her belt, with-
out her noticing anything, and, in high spirits, took his leave of her. Dis-
demona, unaware of this, went home and, busy with other thoughts, did
not miss the handkerchief. But a few days afterwards, as she was looking
for it and could not ﬁnd it, she became anxious in case the Moor should ask
her about it, as he was accustomed to do. The vicious Ensign, choosing a suit-
able time, went to the Corporal’s house and left the handkerchief [3.3.323–4;
3.4.175] at the head of the bed. The Corporal noticed nothing until the fol-
lowing day when, as he was rising from bed, he knocked the handkerchief
to the ground and put his foot on it. Since he could not fathom how it came
to be in his house and recognized it as being Disdemona’s, he decided to
return it to her. He waited for the Moor to leave the house, went to the back
door and knocked. Fortune seemed to have conspired with the Ensign to
bring about the death of the unfortunate Lady, since at that very moment
the Moor came home. When he heard knocking at the door, he went to the
window and angrily demanded ‘Who is that knocking?’ The Corporal,
having heard the Moor’s voice and fearing that he might come down to
harm him, ran away without uttering a word. The Moor went downstairs,
opened the outside door into the street and looked around, but saw no one.
Having gone back into the house, ﬁlled with bitter anger, he asked his wife who
had been knocking at the door. The Lady answered truthfully that she did not
know. [3.3.36–40] But the Moor replied ‘It looked to me like the Corporal.’
The Lady responded that she did not know whether it was him or some-
body else.
   The Moor checked his rage, despite the fact that he was fuming. He
decided not to act until he had ﬁrst talked to the Ensign, whom he sought
out straight away, told him what had happened, and entreated him to ﬁnd
out from the Corporal all he could about the incident. The Ensign, rejoicing
at this latest turn of events, promised he would do so. He talked to the Cor-
poral one day when the Moor was in a place where he could see them conversing.
While talking to the Corporal about every other matter except that concerning
the Lady, the Ensign burst into loud laughter and, feigning great surprise, moved
his head and gesticulated as if he were listening to extraordinary things.
[4.1.89–163] The moment the Moor saw them part company, he went to

                                      439
                                  Appendix C

the Ensign to learn what they had said to each other. The Ensign, after
making the Moor beg him for a while, ﬁnally said: ‘He concealed nothing
from me, telling me that he took his pleasure with your wife every time
your absence gave him the chance and saying that the last time they were
together she gave him the handkerchief that you gave her as a present
when you married her.’ The Moor thanked the Ensign and thought that if
the Lady did not any longer have the handkerchief, then it was obvious that
things must be just as the Ensign said. [3.3.440–2] One day after dinner, there-
fore, while discussing various matters with his wife, he asked her for the hand-
kerchief. The poor woman, who had greatly feared this, grew red in the face at the
request and, to conceal her blushing (which, however, did not escape the Moor’s
eyes), she ran to the chest pretending to look for it. After searching for a while,
she said ‘I don’t know why I can’t ﬁnd it; perhaps you have had it.’ The Moor
replied: ‘If I had it, why would I ask you for it? You can look for it at your own
leisure some other time.’ [3.4.30–95]
   Once he had left, he began thinking of how he might murder his wife and the
Corporal too in such a way that he wouldn’t be accused of it [4.1.164–86]; and
since he thought about this day and night, the Lady could not help noticing
that his attitude towards her had changed. She enquired about this several
times: ‘What is it that is troubling you and has altered you from the most cheer-
ful person in the world into the most melancholic of men?’ [3.4.118–21;
4.2.42–3, 99–102] The Moor tried to answer his wife in several ways, but
none of them satisﬁed her; and although she knew that no action of hers
could have upset the Moor to such an extent, she nevertheless thought
that, because of their inordinate lovemaking in the past, he might have
grown bored with her. Sometimes she would tell the Ensign’s wife, ‘I do not
know what to make of the Moor. He used to be all-loving towards me, but in the
last few days he has changed. [3.4.120–1] I very much fear that I shall be held
up as an example to young girls who wish to marry against their family’s
wishes, and to Italian girls so that they may learn not to choose a man whom
nature, God and manner of life make so different from us. [3.3.233–7] Since I
know that he is such a good friend of your husband’s and opens his heart
to him, I beg you, if you have heard anything from him which you can tell
me, to come to my help.’ She uttered these words in a rush, weeping as she
spoke. The Ensign’s wife, who was au fait with everything (that is, with the
way in which her husband had tried to use her as an instrument in his plan
to kill the Lady), but who had never wanted to become part of it, did not
wish to say anything for fear of her husband. She said only: ‘Be careful not
to arouse your husband’s suspicion, and try as hard as you can to make
him recognise the love and loyalty you feel for him.’ ‘That is exactly what I
do, but to no avail,’ answered the Lady.
   In the meantime the Moor tried to ﬁnd conﬁrmation for what he actually did
not want to uncover; he begged the Ensign to ﬁnd a way for him to see the hand-

                                       440
                                  Appendix C

kerchief in the Corporal’s possession. Although this was a difﬁcult undertaking
for the villain, he nevertheless promised that he would do his best to provide such
proof. [3.3.366–8, 399–410] The Corporal kept a woman in his household who
made the most beautiful embroidery on lawn fabric; when she saw the handker-
chief and learned that it belonged to the Moor’s wife, she set out to make one just
like it before it was to be returned. [3.4.183–6] The Ensign noticed that she
was doing this while sitting near a window and that she could be seen by
anyone going past in the street. So he arranged for the Moor to see this, and as
a result the latter was fully convinced that this most virtuous woman was an
adulteress. [4.1.70–171] Accordingly he arranged with the Ensign to have her
and the Corporal killed, and they discussed the ways in which this might be done.
The Moor implored him to kill the Corporal personally, promising that he would
be eternally grateful to him. [4.1.164–76, 192–205] The Ensign, claiming
that this would be a very difﬁcult and dangerous task to carry out because
the Corporal was skilful and courageous, initially refused; but after the
Moor had begged him insistently and offered him a large sum of money, he
extracted a promise from the Ensign that he would tempt Fortune.
   One dark night, soon after they had taken this decision, as the Corporal was
leaving the house of a whore with whom he used to take his pleasure, he was
accosted by the Ensign, sword in hand; ﬁrst aiming a blow at his legs to knock
him down, he cut through the poor man’s right thigh making him fall to the
ground, and then set upon him to ﬁnish him off. But the Corporal was coura-
geous and used to bloody deeds and to facing death; he drew his sword and,
despite being wounded on the legs, set about defending himself and shouted at the
top of his voice ‘I am being murdered!’ When the Ensign, who knew that there
were soldiers quartered nearby, heard people come running, he took to his heels
so that he would not be caught; and then, turning back, he pretended he was
running to where the commotion was taking place. He mingled with the others
and, noticing that the Corporal’s leg had been cut off, he thought that even if he
wasn’t dead, he would soon die of this blow. Despite the fact that he was very
happy at this outcome, he commiserated with the Corporal as if he were his own
brother. [4.2.226–41; 5.1.1–73] Next morning the whole city knew about
the incident, which also reached Disdemona’s ears; whereupon, since she
was good-natured and did not imagine that harm would come of it, she
showed great sorrow for what had happened. The Moor drew some very
negative conclusions from this. He went to see the Ensign and said to him:
‘You know that my fool of a wife is so distressed about what has happened
to the Corporal that she is going crazy!’ To which the Ensign answered:
‘What else could you expect, since he is her very soul?’ To which the Moor
retorted: ‘The very soul, eh? I shall tear her soul from her body; and I
would not consider myself a man unless I were to rid the world of this
wicked woman.’ As they were discussing whether the Lady should be poisoned
or stabbed to death [4.1.194–202], and were unable to agree on any method,

                                       441
                                   Appendix C

the Ensign said: ‘I have thought of something which would make you
happy and not attract anybody’s suspicion. Here is the plan: the house
in which you live is very old and the ceiling of your bedroom has many
cracks; I intend beating Disdemona to death with a stocking ﬁlled with
sand—without, however, leaving any mark on her body. As soon as she is
dead, we shall make part of the ceiling collapse; and we shall smash the
Lady’s skull, making it look as if it was a beam from the ceiling which did
it; this way no one will suspect you, as every one will think she died as a
result of the accident.’
   The Moor appreciated this wicked advice [4.1.202–5] and waited for the
appropriate moment. One night, having previously hidden the Ensign in a
closet which opened on to the bedroom, he was in bed with her, when the
Ensign, as per the agreed signal, made a big commotion in the closet.
Drawing his wife’s attention to it, the Moor asked: ‘Did you hear that
noise?’ And she replied: ‘Yes, I heard it.’ ‘Get up,’ the Moor went on. ‘Go
and see what it is all about.’ The wretched Disdemona got out of bed and,
as soon as she approached the closet, the Ensign jumped out and, being
strong and muscular, hit her with the stocking which he had ready, giving
her such a blow in the middle of her back that she collapsed, with the
breath knocked out of her. But with the little voice she still had, she called
out to the Moor for help; and, as he got out of the bed, he said to her: ‘Most
vicious of women, this is the reward for your unchastity. This is how those
women should be treated who, pretending to love their husbands, put
cuckold’s horns on their heads.’ Hearing this, the wretched woman, feel-
ing that she was about to die (since the Ensign had inﬂicted another blow
on her) declared that she called on divine justice as a witness to her ﬁdelity, since
worldly justice was failing her. While invoking God’s help she was struck for the
third time [5.2.33–4, 59–63, 85–6, 123] and was ﬁnished off by the wicked
Ensign. After placing her in bed and breaking her skull, the Moor and the
Ensign caused the ceiling to collapse, just as they had planned, and the
Moor started crying for help, shouting that the house was falling down.
The neighbours soon arrived and found the bed with the Lady dead [5.2.121,
183] under the rafters. Since she had led a good life, her death was lament-
ed by one and all. The next day Disdemona was buried amid the universal
mourning of the populace. But God, the just observer of men’s souls, did
not want such an iniquitous deed to go without the punishment it
deserved. For this reason the Moor, who had loved the Lady more than his own
eyes [3.3.91–3], started mourning her death. He missed her so badly that he
began to lose his mind [5.2.99–103, 270–80], wandering all over the house
and thinking that the Ensign had been the cause of his losing with his wife
all the joy of his life and the very reason for his existence. As a result he
started to hate the Ensign so much that he could not bear even looking at him
[5.2.299–300]; and, if he had not feared the inviolable justice of the Ven-

                                        442
                                 Appendix C

etian Lords, he would have surely killed him. [5.2.285] But since he could not
safely do this, he relieved him of his post and did not want him any longer
in his company. As a result, such animosity developed between the two
that no one could imagine any deeper or more bitter feud. For this reason
the Ensign, the most wicked of criminals, turned all his thoughts to injur-
ing the Moor. When he found out that the Corporal had recovered and that
he was managing with a wooden leg instead of the one which had been
chopped off, he said to him: ‘The time has come for you to avenge the loss
of your leg. The moment you are ready to come to Venice with me, I shall
tell you who was responsible for this crime (since I do not dare to reveal it
here for a number of reasons) and I’ll testify on your behalf at the trial.’
The Corporal, who thought himself greatly wronged and did not know the
reason, thanked the Ensign and went to Venice with him. Once they got
there the Ensign told him that the Moor had been responsible for the loss of
his leg because he had convinced himself that he was Disdemona’s lover;
and for this very reason, he was also the one who had killed her and had
then spread the rumour that she was killed by the collapsed ceiling. After
hearing this, the Corporal denounced the Moor to the Signoria both for the
severing of his leg and for the death of the Lady. He called as his witness
the Ensign who corroborated both pieces of information and said that the
Moor had conﬁded everything in him, that he had tried to convince him to
carry out both crimes, and that, after he had killed his wife because of the
bestial jealousy that had bred in his mind, he had told him about the way
in which he had killed her. The Venetian lords, after learning of the cruel-
ty with which the Barbarian [1.1.111; 1.3.349] had treated one of their
own citizens, gave orders for him to be arrested in Cyprus and to be taken to
Venice, where they tortured him severely in order to squeeze the truth out of
him. [Cf. Iago, 5.2.331–6] But the Moor was strong-willed and resisted all
the tortures and denied everything so ﬁrmly that nothing could be extracted from
him. [Cf. Iago, 5.2.301–4] Although by his steadfastness he escaped death,
after many days in prison, he was condemned to banishment for life; and
eventually he was killed, as he deserved, by the Lady’s relatives. The Ensign
returned to his own country; and, as was his inveterate practice, he laid
accusations against one of his companions, saying that the latter had tried
to engage him to murder one of his enemies, who was a gentleman. For
this reason the man was arrested and tortured; since he denied that what
the accuser had said was true, the Ensign too was arrested and tortured
[5.2.301–4, 331–4, 368] so that they could weigh up the two conﬂicting
stories. He was tortured so badly that his intestines were ruptured. After
leaving the prison and going home, he soon died of his injuries; and thus
God avenged Disdemona’s innocence. After his death the Ensign’s wife,
who was aware of what had happened, told the whole story, just as I have
related it to you.’

                                     443
                                 Appendix C

The Third Decade, Story 8
. . . It appeared astonishing to everybody that a human heart could harbour such
malice [5.2.299–300]; and the case of the unfortunate Lady drew tears
from everyone. Remembering the unfortunate name that she had been
given by her father, the party decided that, since the name is the ﬁrst gift
which a father bestows upon his son, he should give him a great-sounding
and fortunate name as if he wanted to wish him wealth and greatness. The
Moor was no less blamed for being so gullible in his beliefs [5.2.161–2, 224,
232], while everyone praised the Lord from whom the wicked had received
their well-deserved punishment.




                                     444
                                 appendix d
                        THE MUSIC IN THE PLAY
                          Linda Phyllis Austern

Othello is neither as musical as Shakespeare’s late romances, nor as simply
reliant on the realistic musics of state and battleﬁeld as the history plays.
Musically speaking, it is probably best known for the ‘willow song’
assigned to Desdemona in Act 4, Scene 3, whose oldest complete version
has become one of the most performed extant pieces of early modern Eng-
lish music (see Discography below), and whose hauntingly lyrical melody
remains memorable even apart from its theatrical context. Othello is a
work in which each musical scene, and each musical piece, is highly sig-
niﬁcant to the unfolding of the narrative, or to the establishment of set-
ting, or to revelation of the psychological states and motivation of the
characters—or to some combination of these. Even the most seemingly
casual piece of music can serve to establish a sense of social reality and
location on the relatively bare Elizabethan stage.1


(i)   Trumpet Signals
Trumpets at 2.1.174.1, 4.1.205, and 4.2.169.1 announce the arrival of
important personages or summon guests to a ceremonial meal, as they
would have done in the world outside the theatre. Each of these will have
consisted of a fairly simple, primarily rhythmic call, for the early modern
trumpet was more limited in its range and melodic capacities than its
descendants. Each, however, must also be distinctive; for not only is Iago
able to identify Othello by the sound of his trumpet before he enters
(2.1.174.1), but to speculate that an unfamiliar trumpet heralds ‘some-
thing from Venice’ (4.1.206). The ﬁnal use of the instrument is doubtless

  1
     A comprehensive listing of all extant musical settings from performances of
Othello from the seventeenth century to the late twentieth is included in Brian N. S.
Gooch and David Thatcher (eds.), A Shakespeare Music Catalogue, 6 vols. (Oxford,
1991), ii. 1200–82. For the use of music in the Shakespearian theatre, including
Othello, see Ross W. Dufﬁn, Shakespeare’s Songbook (New York, 2004); Richmond
Noble, Shakespeare’s Use of Song, with the Text of the Principal Songs (Oxford, 1923);
F. W. Sternfeld, Music in Shakespearean Tragedy (London and New York, 1963);
Peter J. Seng, The Vocal Songs in the Plays of Shakespeare: a Critical Study (Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1967); John H. Long, Shakespeare’s Use of Music: the Histories and
Tragedies (Gainesville, Fla., 1971); John S. Manifold, The Music in English Drama from
Shakespeare to Purcell (1956). The settings printed below are adapted from Sternfeld
(1, 3, 5) and Long (2, 4).

                                        445
                                             Appendix D

the most intricate, for the dialogue indicates that multiple trumpets—
‘these instruments’—perform (4.2.170). They do not herald the imminent
arrival of military or political ofﬁcials, but instead call invitees to a
formal state supper, the sort of occasion famous for the elaborate use of
music.


(ii) Drinking song fragments (Act 2, Scene 3)
The ﬁrst fully musical episode in the play occurs in Act 2, Scene 3, in which
Iago sings fragments of two songs as part of his drunken revelry with
Cassio and Montano. These belong to the stylistically simple repertoire
of ballads and tavern songs, a body of orally circulating works con-
demned for their desultory style of performance and negative moral effect
by many of the same Elizabethan writers who censured stage plays. Music
for both songs has been reconstructed several times. The original tune
for the ﬁrst, ‘And let me the cannikin clink’, has yet to come to light; it
has been suggested that the song may have been specially written for the
play in the style of the era’s drinking songs, but the text is simple and
metrical enough to be ﬁtted to several extant popular tunes. Two are given
here.




Ex. 1




                 And     let         me        the    can             ni      kin       clink,
4



        clink,    And          let     me      the   can             ni kin         clink.        A
8



           sol    dier’s a           man;     O man’s       life’s      but     a      span—          Why
10



        then           let      a      sol              dier          drink,                 drink.

                                                446
                                        Appendix D

Ex. 2




                  And       let     me the       can         ni     kin         clink,
4



         clink,    And      let     me the       can         ni     kin         clink
8



         clink.       A       sol   dier’s a         man; O         man’s life’s         but a
12



        span— Why then let            a        sol           dier      drink,              drink.




   The second, ‘King Stephen was a worthy peer’, is the seventh of eight
stanzas from the ballad ‘Take Thy Old Cloak About Thee’, whose text was
collected as part of Thomas Percy’s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry
(1765), and is probably originally from Scotland or the north of England.
The same section of the same song is alluded to in The Tempest (4.1.221–2),
when Trinculo says ‘O King Stefano, O peer! O worthy Stefano, look what
a wardrobe here is for thee!’, which attests to its popularity. The tune (or at
least a later variant that works with the text Shakespeare uses) was also
collected in Percy’s era, and is given here.




Ex. 3




            King      Ste    phen was                and a    wor         thy peer,          His

3



     bree ches cost          him    but      a crown,             He      held them six      pence

                                               447
                                           Appendix D

6



     all     too dear,   With       that     he called       the          tai   lor lown.   He
9



     was     a wight        of high         re nown,         And thou           art but      of
12



     low     de gree:      ’Tis pride that pulls             the     coun try down,         Then

15



      take        thy     old              cloak         a         bout             thee.




   Apart from contributing to the social realism of the carousal scene, and
altering the audience’s sense of the passage of time, these songs help to
shape the relationship between Iago and Cassio, suggesting that Iago is (no
doubt deliberately) drinking less than his companions—since, after all,
one cannot simultaneously drink and sing. Moreover, since many of
Shakespeare’s contemporaries considered music itself to be a potentially
dangerous intoxicant, the songs may have helped the audience to sense
the increasing ‘rouse’ that Cassio begins to feel even before Iago calls for
wine by way of preface to his ﬁrst song.


(iii) Cassio’s aubade and other musical references (Act 3, Scene 1)
Act 3 opens with Cassio’s misguided morning serenade to Othello and Des-
demona. This scene, often omitted in performance, is predicated as much
on an understanding of the multi-level early modern meanings of music
as on the evidently opposed social customs of the serenade and the chari-
vari.1 Dialogue makes clear that the music in this scene is performed on
wind instruments by hired professional musicians. The Clown’s bawdy
puns draw attention to the phallic shape and nasal timbre of the instru-
ments. Early modern town bands, known in England as waits, performed
predominantly on such loud ‘outdoor’ instruments as shawms or hautbois


                                1
                                    See Bristol, ‘Charivari’.

                                              448
                               Appendix D

(hoboys), which had a nasal resonance not unlike the modern oboe. Thus
the band available to Cassio is entirely in keeping with cultural custom;
presumably, they are the municipal waits of Shakespeare’s imagined
Cyprus, paid for a one-off job in the manner of their English counterparts.
However, the Clown’s punning references to a hanging tail and to a bag
imply that at least one of the instruments may be a more rustic bagpipe,
age-old butt of phallus-and-ﬂatulence jokes across literary and visual
media, and an equally obvious and venerable signiﬁer of male impotence.
The original music probably belonged to the classic and widespread morn-
ing genre of the aubade (or hunts-up); one such example, from a manu-
script of c.1588–1609 in the Folger Shakespeare Library (Folger MS
1610.1), is given here:



 Ex. 4




 5




         9




                                   449
                                    Appendix D

 13




Although the Folger arrangement is for lute, the piece is readily playable by
up to ﬁve musicians; and in this case a bagpipe drone should probably be
added to three or four shawms.
   Even more important than audible music in this scene are the references
to ‘music that may not be heard’ and to Othello’s lack of interest in musi-
cal art. In addition to the contrast between the sounding music meant to
induce love and the silent music of love itself, any mention of unheard
music would have suggested the perfect, eternal music of the spheres—the
ultimate concord of true harmony so conspicuously absent from the world
of this play whose clumsy musicians cannot evoke it. At the same time, the
Clown’s statement that ‘to hear music the general does not greatly care’
resonates both with Castiglione’s portrait of the early modern professional
soldier as one who eschews music as effeminate artiﬁce, and with Loren-
zo’s chilling depiction of ‘The man that hath no music in himself’ in The
Merchant of Venice (5.1.83–8).1 The idea that unmusical individuals were
untrustworthy, savage, and possessed of ‘affections dark as Erebus’ was so
widespread in Shakespeare’s England that the earliest full-length English-
language treatise on music (1586) prominently cites Polydore Virgil’s
statement that ‘if I made any one which cannot brook or fancy music,
surely I erred and made a monster’.2 Thus Othello’s indifference to music,
especially when taken in conjunction with his own description of Desde-
mona as ‘an admirable musician [who] will sing the savageness out of a
bear’ (4.1.182–3), may hint at one of the underlying causes of their
tragedy.


(iv) The Willow Song (4.3.37–52)
It is, in fact, that admirable musician’s performance that stands at the
heart of the most famous musical scene of the play: the ‘willow song’ of
Act 4, Scene 3. No song from any of Shakespeare’s works has attracted

  1
      See Baldassare Castiglione, The Courtyer, trans. Thomas Hoby (1561), sig. Jii.
  2
      The Praise of Musicke (Oxford, 1586), p. 74.

                                         450
                                   Appendix D

more attention or inspired more composers. New settings of it have been
written by many from the late seventeenth century onwards, among them
Pelham Humphrey, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Arthur Sullivan, Percy
Grainger, and Ralph Vaughan Williams, as well as Giuseppe Verdi in his
magniﬁcent operatic version of Shakespeare’s play.
   During the sixteenth century and early seventeenth there were so many
English laments for lost love with refrains evoking the willow tree as to
constitute a distinct genre, of which Shakespeare clearly took advantage
in Othello—though his is the only known example in which the lamenting
lover is a woman. There is no evidence that any previously existing
song-text or music served as a direct model for the one assigned to Desde-
mona, but Shakespeare’s lyric may have subsequently inspired a number
of broadsides. Some willow songs were disseminated as poetry without
musical notes, while others were preserved in versions for instruments
alone with only a ‘willow’ title. Several early modern English music manu-
scripts include willow songs that music scholars have modiﬁed with vary-
ing degrees of success to ﬁt Shakespeare’s lyrics. However, only one
roughly contemporary tune ﬁts Shakespeare’s text with minimal alter-
ation—‘The poore soule sate sighing’ from British Library MS Add. 15117
(fol. 18).1 This musical miscellany, dating from c.1614 to 1616, preserves a
signiﬁcant quantity of music from the ﬁnal quarter of the sixteenth centu-
ry as well as newer pieces, including a number of other songs used in the
Elizabethan and Jacobean theatre; and, since the nineteenth century, its
willow song setting has been the one most often considered ‘authentic’,
becoming traditional in modern productions with period music, as well as
on recordings of Shakespearian songs. The ﬁrst stanza, refrain, and sever-
al other lines of ‘The poore soule’ show marked resemblances to Desde-
mona’s lyric (albeit using the conventional masculine narrative voice);
however, this may simply reﬂect the fact that the two versions (as well as
the famous broadsides later included in the Percy and Roxburghe ballad
collections) made use of a common (lost) source. Shakespeare’s version,
with the music from the British Library manuscript, follows:

Ex. 5




                     The   poor soul sat     sigh ing                       by a
                     The   fresh streams ran  by her,                       and
                     Let    no      bo dy blame him,                         his
                      I    call’d my love ‘false love’;                     but
  1
      Available in facsimile as the ﬁrst manuscript in Elise Bickford Jorgens (ed.),
English Song 1600–1675: Facsimiles of Twenty-Six Manuscripts (New York, 1986),
vol. i.

                                       451
                                            Appendix D

5



       sy  ca more tree,                             Sing    all      a green       wil low.
      mur mur’d her moans,
     scorn  I ap prove—
     what said he   then?
10



                      Her     hand on her            bo som, her      head               on her
                      Her      salt tears fell      from her, and     sof              ten’d the
                       If       I court more         wo men, you’ll couch               with more

14



      knee.       Sing            wil low, wil low, wil low,             wil    low;    Sing
     stones.
      men.

17



       wil low, wil low, wil low,             wil    low     must          be       my gar



20



     land.     Sing     all       a green   wil low:        wil     low, wil low, wil low;



25



                 Sing       all     a green wil        low must     be     my gar      land.




   The dramaturgical effect of this song is carefully calculated: not only
does the music itself contrast in every way possible with that used else-
where in the play, but the circumstances of its performance help to
emphasize Desdemona’s chaste propriety. Othello has already spoken of
her excellence as a musician, suggesting how intensely the exquisite sound
of her voice, distracted though she is, can be expected to move the audi-
ence. At the same time, by linking her musicianship to her skill with the
needle (4.1.182–3), he places it ﬁrmly in the world of feminine decorum.
According to early modern English social codes, public musical perform-
                                               452
                              Appendix D

ance of any sort by a woman was a sign of whoredom; and even to play or
sing in front of a man in private was perceived as an invitation to
dangerous erotic pleasure. In marriage, however, it could stand for the
harmonious bond between husband and wife. Thus Desdemona, the
‘admirable musician’, whose music, like that of the unfortunate Orpheus,
can tame a savage beast, restricts her skill to the culturally appropriate
conﬁnes of feminine domesticity; yet even in this innocent display of
musical propriety, the melancholy tone of Desdemona’s song seems heavy
with foreknowledge of her own death.




Select Discography
‘A Distant Mirror—Shakespeare’s Music’
Delos DDD
Performers: The Folger Consort
Music from Othello: ‘Willow Song’

‘As You Like It—Shakespeare in Music’
Sony Classical NPR SMK 61874
Performers: various
Music from Othello: ‘Othello: The Willow Song’

‘The English Lute Song’
Dorian DOR-90109
Performers: Julianne Baird (soprano) and Ronn McFarlane (lute)
Music from Othello: ‘The Willow Song’

‘Music of Shakespeare’
Channel Classics CCS 11497
Performers: Alba Musica Kyo
Music from Othello: ‘Willow Song’

‘Shakespeare’s Music’
Dorian DOR-90017
Performers: various (this is a compilation CD from other Dorian
recordings)
Music from Othello: ‘The Willow Song’

‘Shakespeare’s Musick: Songs & Dances from Shakespeare’s Plays’
Philips 446 687–2
Performers: Musicians of the Globe (directed by Philip Pickett)
Music from Othello: ‘The Poor Soul Sat Sighing (The Willow Song)’
                                    453
                              Appendix D

‘Shakespeare Songs’
Harmonia Mundi Musique d’abord HMA 195202
Performers: Alfred Deller (counter-tenor) and Desmond Dupré (lute)
Music from Othello: ‘Willow Song’

‘Songs & Dances from Shakespeare’
Saydisc CD-SDL 409
Performers: The Broadside Band (directed by Jeremy Barlow)
Music from Othello: ‘The Poor Soul Sat Sighing (The Willow Song)’




                                  454
                              appendix e
                  ALTERATIONS TO LINEATION

Mislineation is common in both F and Q. For a discussion of the problems
and principles involved in realigning improperly set verse, see Appendix D
in my edition of Anthony and Cleopatra (Oxford, 1994), pp. 370–4. The
most comprehensive recent treatment of Shakespeare’s versiﬁcation is
George T. Wright, Shakespeare’s Metrical Art (Berkeley, Calif., 1988); but
lineation issues are best explored in Paul Werstine’s ‘Line Division in
Shakespeare’s Verse: An Editorial Problem’, Analytical and Enumerative
Bibliography 8 (1984), 73–125.



1.1. 4–7      ’Sblood . . . city] This edition; f divides after ‘dream’, ‘abhor
              me’, ‘told’st me’, ‘hate’, ‘despise me’, but probably assumes
              that ‘Of . . . told’st me’ and ‘Thou . . . Despise me’ constitute
              shared lines; q divides after ‘hear me’, ‘abhor me’, ‘hate’;
              steevens and many eds. divide after ‘hear me’, ‘matter’,
              ‘Abhor me’, ‘hate’
    16–17     I have . . . he] pope; as one line f, q
    34        Why . . . service] rowe; f, q divide after ‘remedy’
    37        Stood . . . yourself] f; q divides after ‘ﬁrst’
    49–52     Whip . . . lords] f; q divides after ‘knaves’, ‘forms’, ‘hearts’,
              ‘throwing’
    53–4      Do well . . . soul] rowe; f, q divide after ‘them’, ‘coats’,
              ‘homage’
     79       Awake . . . thieves!] f; q divides after ‘Brabantio’
     82–3     What summons . . . there] q; f divides after ‘terrible’
     91–2     Or . . . say] f; as one line q
     105–6    What . . . grange] q; f divides after ‘robbing’
     156–7    Which . . . search] f; q divides after ‘surely’
     168      O . . . blood] q; f divides after ‘out’
1.2. 8–9      Against . . . have] pope; as one line f, q
     34       The servants . . . lieutenant] q; f divides after ‘Duke[s]’
     59–61    Keep . . . weapons] q; as prose f
     62       O . . . daughter] q; f divides after ‘thief’
1.3. 18–19    This . . . pageant] f; q divides after ‘reason’
     47       Write . . . dispatch] q; f divides after ‘us’
     92       Of . . . charms] q; f divides after ‘love’
     95–6     A . . . motion] f, q2; q1 divides after ‘spirit’

                                    455
                                 Appendix E

     122   Ensign . . . place] q; f divides after ‘them’
     198   Let . . . sentence] q; f divides after ‘sentence’
     366–70Where . . . land] This edition; as prose f, q
     390–1 And . . . are] f; as one line q
2.1. 22–3  That . . . sufferance] f; q1 divides after ‘seen’; q2 divides after
           ‘halts’, ‘Venice’
    26–7   The ship . . . Cassio] q; as one line f
    31     I . . . governor] q; f divides after ‘on’t’
    37     Like . . . ho!] f; q divides after ‘soldier’
    74     She . . . captain] q; f divides after ‘of’
    81     Give . . . spirits] f; q divides after ‘ﬁre’
    91     O . . . company] as one line q; f divides after ‘feare’
    109–13 Come . . . beds] as verse q; as prose f
    112–13 Players . . . beds] This edition; as one line q
    117    What . . . praise me] as one line f; q divides after ‘of me’
    120    Come . . . harbour] as one line q; f divides after ‘assay’
    125–8 I . . . delivered] as verse q; as prose f
    131    Well . . . witty] q; f divides after ‘praised’
    137–8 These . . . foolish] as prose f; q divides after ‘alehouse’, ‘her’
    159–64 O . . . scholar] as prose f; q divides after ‘conclusion’,
           ‘husband’, ‘liberal’, ‘counsellor’, ‘him’
    175    The . . . trumpet] as verse f, q2; as prose q1
    179    To . . . joy] as one line q; f divides after ‘me’
    189    But . . . increase] as one line q; f divides after ‘loves’
    194–6 O . . . am] as verse q; as prose f; honigmann begins new line
           with ‘O’, divides after ‘down’, ‘honest’
    197    News . . . drowned] q; f divides after ‘done’
2.3.21–4   What . . . love] as prose q; f divides after ‘has’, ‘provocation’,
           ‘eye’, ‘modest’, ‘speaks’
    47     As . . . Roderigo] q; f divides after ‘dog’
    55     And . . . drunkards] q; f divides after ‘too’
    57     That . . . come] f; q divides after ‘isle’
    61–2   Good . . . ho] as verse q; as prose f
    65–6   A . . . span] capell; as one line f, q
    122–3 It . . . it] f; as one line q
    132–3 It . . . Moor] f; as one line q
    142–4 Nay . . . mazard] as prose q; f divides after ‘lieutenant’,
           ‘hand’, ‘sir’
    155–6  ’Swounds, I . . . dies] as one line f, q (f omits ‘ ’Swounds’, q
           omits ‘He dies’)
    243–5 All’s . . . off] as f, q; pope divides after ‘bed’, ‘surgeon’, ‘off’;
           sanders (treating ‘Lead him off’ as a direction) divides after
           ‘bed’, ‘surgeon’

                                     456
                                Appendix E

    253–6   Reputation . . . reputation] as prose f; q divides after ‘lost my
            reputation’, ‘myself’, ‘my reputation’, ‘My reputation’
     321    And . . . villain] q; f divides after ‘then’
     324    To . . . easy] q; f divides after ‘again’
     347    That . . . Roderigo] as one line pope; f, q divide after ‘all’
     367    Nay . . . done] as one line q; f divides after ‘gone’
     369–70 I’ll . . . apart] q; as one line f
3.1. 22     No . . . you] as prose q; f divides after ‘friend’
     31–5   Why . . . access] capell; f divides after ‘parted’, ‘wife’,
            ‘Desdemona’; q divides after ‘parted’, ‘her’, ‘Desdemona’;
            sanders divides after ‘parted’, ‘Iago’, ‘her’, ‘Desdemona’;
            honigmann divides after ‘parted’, ‘in’, ‘will’, ‘me’
     35–6   Procure . . . presently] f, q; as one line ridley; ‘Some . . .
            presently’ as one line honigmann
     46–7   And great . . . loves you] f, q; honigmann divides after
            ‘afﬁnity’, ‘but’
3.3.3       Good . . . husband] q; f divides after ‘do’
     96–7   Did . . . love] as q; f divides after ‘Cassio’
     97–8   He . . . ask] f; as one line q
     105–6 Honest . . . I honest] f; as one line q
     161    Who . . . nothing] as one line q; f divides after ‘trash’
     206    They . . . conscience] as one line q; f divides after ‘husbands’
     214    He . . . blame] as one line q; f divides after ‘witchcraft’
     220    Comes . . . moved] as one line q; f divides after ‘love’
     227    Which . . . friend] as one line q; f divides after ‘not’
     230    Long . . . think so] as one line q; f divides after ‘she so’
     232    Ay . . . you] as one line q; f divides after ‘point’
     242–4 Farewell . . . Iago] rowe; f divides after ‘farewell’, ‘know
            more’, ‘observe’; q divides after ‘if more’, ‘set on’
     246    Why . . . doubtless] as one line q; f divides after ‘marry’
     285–6 Why . . . well] f; as one line q
     305    You . . . common thing] as one line q (omits ‘You have’); f
            divides after ‘me’
     317–18 What . . . ﬁlch it] q1; as prose f; q2 divides after ‘with it’;
            ‘What . . . earnest’ as one line theobald and many eds.
     321–2 Be . . . me] f; as one line q
     374–5 For . . . that] f; as one line q
     416–19 And . . . Cassio] f; q divides after ‘sleep’, ‘soul’, ‘affairs’
     425–7 That . . . Moor] as q; f divides after ‘thigh’, ‘fate’
     446    All . . . gone] as one line f, q; pope divides after ‘heaven’
     453    Never . . . Sea] f; q2 divides after ‘Iago’
     474    ’Tis . . . live] as one line q; f divides after ‘request’
     475    Damn . . . her!] as one line q; f divides after ‘minx’

                                    457
                                 Appendix E

    478     For . . . lieutenant] as one line q; f divides after ‘devil’
3.4.30–1    I . . . lord] steevens–reed; f divides after ‘be’; q divides after
            ‘now’
     34     Give . . . lady] as one line q; f divides after ‘hand’
     46     I . . . promise] as one line q; f divides after ‘this’
     50–4   Lend . . . that handkerchief] This edition; f, q divide after
            ‘handkerchief’, ‘lord’, ‘you’, ‘me’, ‘Not’, ‘lord’
     88     Fetch . . . misgives] as one line q; f divides after ‘handkerchief’
     141–4 Though . . . gods] f; q divides after ‘object’, ‘ache’, ‘mem-
            bers’, ‘think’
     150–2 Pray . . . you] f; q divides after ‘think’, ‘toy’
     183    I . . . chamber] as one line q; f divides after ‘neither’
4.1. 1–2    Will . . . kiss] capell; f, q divide after ‘so’, ‘Iago’, ‘private’
     22     Ay . . . What] as one line dyce; f, q divide after ‘that’, ‘now’
     41–4   Work on . . . Othello] as verse f; as prose q
     41     Work . . . caught] as one line capell; f divides after ‘on’
     110–11 Now . . . said] f; q divides after ‘o’er [on]’
     116–18 I . . . ha!] as prose pope; f divides after ‘bear’, ‘it’; q1 divides
            after ‘wit’; q2 divides after ‘customer’, ‘wit’
     124–6 This . . . promise] as prose q; f divides after ‘out’, ‘marry her’
     134–5 So . . . ha!] as prose q; f divides after ‘upon me’
     136–8 Now . . . it to] as prose f; q divides after ‘chamber’
     151–2  How . . . now? How now?] as prose q; f divides after ‘Bianca’
     172–3 I . . . woman!] as prose q; f divides after ‘killing’
     186–7 O . . . condition] as prose q; f divides after ‘times’
     189–90 Nay . . . Iago!] as prose q; f divides after ‘certain’, then prints
            ‘but . . . Iago!’ as prose
     200–4 Do . . . midnight] as prose q; f divides after ‘her bed’,
            ‘contaminated’, ‘Good, good’, ‘very good’, ‘undertaker’
     205    Excellent . . . same] as one line f; q divides after ‘good’; as
            prose sanders
     206–8 I warrant . . . him] f; q lines ‘Something . . . Lodovico |
            Come . . . him’; cambridge 1891 lines ‘I warrant . . .
            Lodovico | This . . . him’; as prose sanders
     214–15 I . . . Cyprus] f, q2; as prose q1
     255    You . . . monkeys] as one line q; f divides after ‘Cyprus’
4.2.25–6    Let . . . face] capell; as one line f, q
     35–8   Come . . . honest] q; as prose f
     40     To . . . false] as one line q; f divides after ‘lord’
     67–8   That . . . sweet] f; q divides after ‘blowing’, ‘fair’
     69     That . . . born] as one line capell; f, q divide after ‘thee’
     80–1   And . . . strumpet] capell; as one line q
     99     Good . . . lord] as one line q; f divides after ‘madam’

                                     458
                                 Appendix E

    110     What . . . you] as one line pope; f, q divide after ‘madam’
    128–9   Beshrew . . . upon him] f; as one line q
    136–8   A . . . likelihood] q; f divides after ‘him’, ‘bones’, ‘whore’,
            ‘company’, ‘time’
     151    I know . . . kneel] as one line f; q2 divides after ‘him’
     174    I . . . me] as one line q; f divides after ‘ﬁnd’
     176–81 Every . . . suffered] as prose f, q2; q1 divides after ‘Iago’, ‘from
            me’, ‘least’, ‘it’, ‘already’
     183–4 Faith . . . together] as prose f; q1 divides after ‘words’; q2
            divides after ‘much’, ‘performance[s]’
     220–7 Sir . . . Cassio] as prose f; q1 divides after ‘Venice’, ‘place’,
            ‘Desdemona’, ‘Venice’, ‘him’, ‘lingered’, ‘so’; q2 divides
            after ‘Venice’, ‘place’, ‘Desdemona’, ‘Venice’, ‘lingered’,
            ‘determinate’
     229–30 Why . . . brains] as prose f; q divides after ‘place’
4.3.4–5     Will . . . Desdemona] capell; as one line f, q
     5–7    Get . . . done] honigmann; as prose f, q
     53–4   So . . . weeping] f, q2; q1 divides after ‘night’
     64–5   The . . . vice] as q; f divides after ‘thing’
     79–80 Yes . . . for] as verse theobald; as prose f, q
     99     Good night . . . send] as one line q; f divides after ‘good
            night.’
5.1. 1      Here . . . come] as one line q; f divides after ‘balk’ (‘Barke’)
     27     I . . . murder] as one line q; f divides after ‘ever’
     38     What . . . murder] as one line q; f divides after ‘passage’
     49     Who’s . . . murder] as one line q; f divides after ‘there’
     57     O . . . this] as one line q; f divides after ‘lieutenant’
     61–2   O murd’rous . . . villain] This edition; as one line f, q
     63     Kill . . . thieves] as one line q; f divides after ‘dark’
     75–6   O . . . Cassio, Cassio.] f; as one line q
     80     I . . . seek you] as one line q; f divides after ‘thus’
     81–2   Lend . . . hence] This edition; f divides after ‘chair’; as prose
            q2
     85–7   To . . . no] f; q1 divides after ‘Cassio’; q2 divides after ‘Cassio’,
            ‘light’
     97     He . . . chair] as one line q; f divides after ‘ ’tis he’
     108–9 Do . . . use] q; f divides after ‘speak’
     110    ’Las . . . husband] as one line q; f divides after ‘matter’
     120–2 I am . . . me] honigmann; f, q divide after ‘honest’
     123    Kind . . . dressed] as one line q; f divides after ‘gentlemen’
5.2.13      That . . . rose] q; f divides after ‘relume’
     29     Alack . . . that] as one line q; f divides after ‘lord’
     33–4   Then . . . me] sanders; as one line f, q

                                      459
                            Appendix E

38     When . . . not] as one line q; f divides after ‘so’
50–1   That . . . Cassio] q; f divides after ‘handkerchief’
51–2   No . . . him] q; f divides after ‘man’
60–1   And . . . Cassio] f; q divides after ‘too’
76–7   Had . . . all] f; q divides after ‘lives’
84     But half . . . prayer] as one line q1; f, q2 print ‘othello
       Being . . . pause’ after ‘hour’
87     My . . . lord!] as one line q; f divides after ‘ho’
103–4 I . . . lord] f; as one line q
113–14 Cassio . . . Roderigo] f; q divides after ‘Venetian’
116–18 Not . . . harsh] honigmann; f, q divide after ‘tune’
131    O . . . devil] f; q divides after ‘she’
134–5 Thou . . . true] q; f divides after ‘say’
148    What . . . husband] q; f divides after ‘woman’
149    O . . . love] as one line q; f divides after ‘mistress’
174    I told . . . more] as one line q; f divides after ‘thought’
176    But . . . false] as one line q; f divides after ‘him’
180    She . . . Cassio] as one line q; f divides after ‘false with Cassio’
181    With . . . tongue] as one line q; f divides after ‘mistress’
182    I . . . speak] as one line q; f divides after ‘tongue’
186    Nay . . . indeed] as one line q; f divides after ‘masters’
192    What . . . home] as one line q; f divides after ‘mad’
202    Poor . . . dead] as one line q; f divides after ‘Desdemon’
224    O . . . of] as one line q; f divides after ‘Moor’
234    But . . . villain] as one line q; f divides after ‘thunder’
235    The . . . wife] as one line q; f divides after ‘falls’
275–6 Even . . . devils] f, q; capell divides after ‘chastity’
283    Where . . . forth] as one line q; f divides after ‘viper’
306    Sir . . . befallen] as one line q; f divides after ‘Sir’
310–11 The . . . Roderigo] f; as one line q
342    Nor . . . speak] as one line q; f divides after ‘malice’
363    This . . . sight] as one line q; f divides after ‘work’




                                460
                               appendix f
                             LONGER NOTES



(i)   Military designations (Persons of the Play)
Shakespeare’s use of military designations calls for comment, both
because they are of some signiﬁcance in the play and because they can be
confusing to modern readers. For more detailed discussion of the various
ranks in the play, see Charles Edelman, Shakespeare’s Military Language: A
Dictionary (2000), Henry J. Webb, ‘The Military Background in Othello’,
Philological Quarterly, 30 (1951), 40–52, and Paul A. Jorgenson, Shake-
speare’s Military World (Berkeley, Calif., 1956), pp. 100–18.

general ‘General’ (originally ‘captain-general’) was a relatively novel des-
ignation for the commander of an army: OED’s earliest citation is 1576,
but it had become standard by the turn of the century. It appears more
frequently in Othello than in any other Shakespeare play, despite the fact
that Giraldi’s Moor is described merely as a ‘captain’ (capitano), a term
which might describe anything from the commander of a company to a
general, depending on its context. However, the original Moor’s com-
mission to Cyprus as Capitani de’ soldati (Commander of the troops) will
have suggested ‘general’ as the equivalent rank—though, as with
‘lieutenant’ and ‘ensign’, it also provides an occasion for signiﬁcant word-
play (see 2.3.302–3; 3.3.347).
lieutenant Giraldi’s character is simply described as ‘un Capo di
Squadra’: capo is variously translated by modern editors as ‘captain’ or
‘corporal’; while capo di squadra is glossed by Florio (p. 82) as ‘a ring-leader
or chief’, and squadra as ‘a part of a company of soldiers of twenty or ﬁve
and twenty whose chief is a corporal’. The period’s terminology of mili-
tary rank is rendered confusing by the fact that senior ofﬁcers could
hold different staff and company ranks; Cassio’s designation, however, is
evidently not that of a modern subaltern, but equivalent to ‘lieutenant-
general’; it thus represents a signiﬁcant change, since it clearly elevates
Cassio above Iago, giving the latter a motive for envy of his fellow ofﬁcer
that is lacking in Giraldi. The use of ‘lieutenant’ (like ‘general’) to desig-
nate a particular military ofﬁce was something of a novelty (OED’s earliest
example is dated 1578)—and a controversial one at that, since a number of
commentators, citing widely admired Spanish practice, argued that this
rank should never have been inserted above that of ‘ensign’ (‘ancient’),

                                     461
                                Appendix F

the captain’s traditional deputy. Thus Digges’s military treatise Stratioticos
(1590) notes that the rank had no equivalent in Roman times, when the
ensign (signifer) was ‘next their captain of greatest reputation—as at this
day he is with the Spaniards, who admit no other lieutenant in their
band. . . . neither see I any cause why in these days we should need them,
if the ensign and other ofﬁcers sufﬁciently knew their duty’ (sigs. P1–P1v).
The citation of Spanish practice is interesting in the light of Iago’s Spanish
name; but in any case tension between holders of this new rank and their
ensigns seems to have been common, for Digges takes care to emphasize
that the lieutenant ‘ought brotherly and friendly to use the ensign’ (sig.
P1v), while in The Art of War and Englands Traynings (1620), Edward Davies
warns every lieutenant to take special care to ‘observe great affability and
fraternity with the alﬁerus [ensign]’ and ‘to avoid all stomaching and strife
that might arise betwixt him and the alﬁerus, for thereby oftentimes great
scandals have fallen out, and the division of the company, a thing above all
other to be carefully foreseen and shunned’ (sigs. O1v–O2).
   The French derivation of the word (from lieu tenant = [one] holding
[another’s] place or position; deputy) gives it important resonances in this
tragedy of displacement, usurpation, and corrupt substitution (see Neill,
‘Places’, and Julia Genster, ‘Lieutenancy, Standing In and Othello’, ELH 57
(1990), 785–805).
ensign In both F and Q Iago is described as Othello’s ‘ancient’ or ‘aun-
cient’, Shakespeare’s preferred spelling of the more usual ‘ensign’ (cf.
Ancient Pistol in 2 Henry IV and Henry V), and thus a literal translation of
Giraldi’s alﬁeri (‘a standard-bearer’). The pronunciation of the two forms
was closer than their orthography might suggest, and they should simply
be regarded as variant spellings of the same word; OED gives ‘ensine’ as
the standard pronunciation, but ‘ensin’ (adopted in many recent produc-
tions, including the Burge/Olivier ﬁlm) is at least equally common and per-
haps better indicates the relation with ancient. For further discussion of
this issue see Gary Taylor, ‘Ancients and Moderns’, SQ 36 (1985), 525–7.
Like Cassio’s lieutenancy, Iago’s seems to be a staff rather than a company
rank. As the general’s personal standard-bearer he would be an ofﬁcer of
some importance (Webb, p. 45), a long way from the disgruntled NCO rep-
resented in some modern productions (see Introduction, pp. 77, 86, 91–9).
According to Stratioticos, ‘the value and virtue of the ensign setteth forth
the virtue and valour of the captain and whole band’ (sig. O4v); thus, iron-
ically enough, Iago (whose sobriquet ‘honest’ can also mean ‘honourable’)
is entrusted with the honour of his commander. His rank acquires a deep-
ened ironic signiﬁcance when he speaks mockingly of his ‘ﬂag or sign of
love— | Which is indeed but sign’ (1.1.155–6). The Digges treatise, in a
suggestive passage, compares the ensign’s concern for his function to that
of a careful husband, ‘above all other [he should] have honourable respect
                                    462
                                 Appendix F

of his charge, and to be no less careful and jealous thereof than every
honest and honourable gentleman should of his wife’ (sig. O1).


(ii)   Othello’s traveller’s tales (1.3.143–5)
143 Cannibals . . . eat Cannibals appear amongst the names of tribal
peoples in Ralegh’s Discoverie of Guiana (1595), and amongst the legends
delineating tribal territories in the map illustrating de Bry’s 1599 edition of
the Discoverie (see ﬁg. 2). An anagram of the word is used to name Caliban,
the ‘salvage and deformed slave’ of Shakespeare’s colonial fantasy The
Tempest. Othello’s travels, then, may have taken him to the New World;
perhaps after he was ‘sold to slavery’.
144 Anthropophagi A legendary tribe ﬁrst described by the Roman
writer Pliny, and here presumably distinct from Cannibals. Pliny includes a
list of monstrous peoples, many of them belonging to the African contin-
ent, among them ‘the Anthropophagi, that feed of man’s ﬂesh’ who
appear in Book 6 between ‘the Pomphagi, who eat all things whatsoever’
and ‘the Cynamolgi, who have heads like dogs’ (sig. O5). Book 7 offers a
lengthy catalogue of human oddities, including Indian and African cave-
dwellers (Troglodytae), ‘Indians [who] engender with beasts, of which gen-
eration are bred certain monstrous mongrels, half beasts and half men’,
and ‘Scythians called Anthropophagi . . . or eaters of men’s ﬂesh’ (sig.
O5v). Pliny’s catalogue of monsters would be expanded by later writers,
notably the author of Sir John Mandeville’s Travels, a book whose fantas-
tical qualities did not prevent its being regarded by Hakluyt and others as
a foundational text of English voyaging.
144–5 men . . . shoulders Cf. also Tempest, 3.3.46–7, ‘men | Whose
heads stood in their breasts’. Pliny’s Book 7 describes an Indian people
known as Blemmyae, ‘without heads standing upon their necks, who
carry eyes in their shoulders’ (sig. O6v), whilst Mandeville follows his
account of anthropophagy in the East Indian island of Dondun with a list
of the ‘diverse folk’ in adjacent islands, including ‘folk of foul stature and
of cursed kynde, that han non hedes. And here [their] eyen ben in here
scholdres, and here mouth is croked as an hors schoo, and that is in the
myddes of here brest. And in another yle also ben folk that han non hedes,
and here eyen and here mouth ben behynde in here schuldres’ (cited from
M. C. Seymour, Mandeville’s Travels (Oxford, 1969), p. 147). Similar ﬁgures
of Blemmyae or Acephali are illustrated on the outer margins of the orbis
terrarum in a number of medieval mappae mundi. The belief in such mon-
strous races died hard: Richard Eden in material attached to the account of
John Lok’s voyage to Guinea (published in his Decades of the New World
(1555) and reprinted in Hakluyt) describes Anthropophagi and headless
‘Blemines’ among the peoples of the African interior; and early modern
                                     463
                                 Appendix F

explorers from Columbus onwards reported the existence of similar
peoples in the New World (see Introduction, pp. 19–21).


(iii) Textual cruxes (3.3.185, 5.2.346)
3.3.185 exsufﬁlate Although both Q and F read exufﬂicate, it is im-
possible to exclude the possibility of common error (see App. B; Honig-
mann, chap. 9). Most editors (following Malone) emend to exsufﬂicate,
glossed by OED (citing only this example, and conjecturing an arbitrary
formation from exsufﬂate = blow out, blow away) as ‘puffed up, inﬂated,
windy’. Since the word appears to form a doublet with blown, this is not
impossible, but the etymology seems strained. Exsufﬁlate, the reading pro-
posed here, would mean ‘hissed, whispered’. Hanmer ﬁrst suggested a pos-
sible coinage from Italian suffolare (= whistle, hiss), which Florio lists in the
form sufﬁlare. If this conjecture is correct, then blown would mean either
‘whispered’ or ‘rumoured’ (see below). Mowat and Werstine guess that
exsufﬂicate and blown may mean ‘spat out and ﬂy-blown’. Other possibili-
ties include exuscitate (= awakened), or exulcerate (= ulcerated, diseased,
corrupted).
5.2.346 Indian Both Q’s Indian and F’s Iudean (Judean) have their
defenders; but they are most unlikely to be true alternatives (as Andrews,
taking F as a possible revision, supposes), since they are too suspiciously
alike. See App. F(iii) Both Q’s Indian and F’s Iudean (Judean) have their
defenders; but they are unlikely to be true alternatives (as Andrews sup-
poses), since they are too alike. Those who prefer Iudean have either (like
Theobald) taken it to allude to Herod’s repudiation of his wife Mariamne,
or (more plausibly) accepted Halliwell’s suggestion that it refers to Judas
Iscariot, Jesus’s Judean disciple. Through his treachery, Judas deprived
himself of the Kingdom of Heaven, described by Matthew (13: 46) as a
‘pearl of great price’; the parallel is arguably supported by the kiss with
which Judas betrayed Christ (‘I kissed thee ere I killed thee’). Moreover,
‘tribe’ had not yet acquired the association with ‘primitive’ peoples fos-
tered by 19th-century ethnography, but was habitually applied to the
twelve biblical divisions of Israel. Cf. also 3.3.178 for Lewkenor’s use of the
term to describe the division of the Venetian people in six ‘tribes’.
   However, as Richard Levin has argued (SQ 33 (1982), 60–7), Othello
would be unlikely to identify himself with Judas in his speech of self-
exculpation. The ignorance of the Indian, by contrast, is consistent with
the hero’s notion of himself as ‘one that loved not wisely’, and whose
‘unlucky deeds’ result not from malice but extreme perplexity. Travellers’
tales repeatedly stress the careless ignorance of pearls and precious stones
manifested by ‘Indian’ savages; and Levin cites numerous literary paral-
lels. Not only does this image of barbaric proﬂigacy recall the exotic scenes
                                      464
                                Appendix F

of Othello’s travels in 1.3, but Indians and Moors were often conﬂated with
one another, as in Marlowe’s reference to ‘Indian Moors’ (Faustus, 1.1.48),
or in the description of the black Moor Eleazar as an ‘Indian slave’ in Lust’s
Dominion (3.4.18–19). Moreover, while pearls characteristically adorn
black Africans in contemporary portraiture, as well as in e.g. Titus (2.1.19)
and Jonson’s Masque of Blacknesse (ll. 59–60, 76–8), Sanders notes an
instance in George Gascoigne’s satire The Steel Glass (1575) where indiffer-
ence to the value of pearls is approvingly credited to Moors them-selves:
‘How live the Moors that spurn at glistering pearl, | And scorn the costs,
which we do hold so dear?’ (sig. D2). Pliny associates pearls with India:
‘The Indian ocean is chief for sending them’ (9.35, sig. Z1v).
   Textually the balance of evidence favours Q. The fact that Indian not
only seemed the better reading to the editor of Q2, but was independently
substituted by the conservative editor of F2 (1632) indicates that contem-
poraries were puzzled by Iudean, a rare word before the 19th century,
though instances occur in the anonymous tragedy Tiberius (1607) and
in Elizabeth Cary’s Tragedy of Mariam (1613). So Iudean is unlikely as a mis-
reading of Indian, though the opposite error is entirely possible. But
‘Indean’ (though rare and not found elsewhere in the Folio) was an alter-
native spelling for ‘Indian’, so the simplest explanation would be that
Iudean resulted either from a scribal or compositorial misreading or from a
turned letter n—of which there are six other examples in F Othello alone.
Macdonald Jackson (‘Editing, Attribution Studies, and “Literature on
Line”’, (Research Opportunities in Renaissance Drama 12 (1998), 1–15 (12))
notes that Indean was apparently misread as Iudean in Thomas Jordan’s
poem Love’s Dialect (1646); and a similar error seems to have affected the
key passage from Jeremiah that played a shaping role in early modern con-
structions of race (see Introduction, p. 126): where the Geneva Bible (the
version most often echoed in Shakespeare) asks whether ‘the blacke More’
can change his skin, all previous translations had spoken of a ‘man of
Inde’; however, at least two early texts—a 1540 edition of the Great Bible,
and a 1549 version of the Matthew Bible—print ‘man of Iude’. In both
cases a turned n seems likely to have been the culprit—though other
occurrences of ‘Iude’ in Jeremiah 13 may have confused the compositors.
Conceivably F’s Iudean was inﬂuenced by an associative recollection of the
erroneous ‘man of Iude’—but the overwhelming preponderance of texts
printing ‘man of Inde’ makes simple coincidence more likely; and Shake-
speare’s appropriation of that phrase in Love’s Labour’s Lost (4.3.220) and
A Midsummer Night’s Dream (2.2.58) shows his familiarity with a context
in which Indian and black Moor appeared to be interchangeable cate-
gories, rendering Othello’s identiﬁcation with a ‘base Indian’ even more
apposite. Finally, as Honigmann points out, the case for Indian is strength-
ened by the metrical desirability of a stress on the ﬁrst, not the second,
syllable of the word (as in Judean).
                                    465
                                  Appendix F

(iv) Other long notes (3.4, 5.2)
3.4.28–9 sun . . . him Othello describes himself as ‘one not easily
jealous, but being wrought, | Perplexed in the extreme’ (5.2.344–5). By
contrast, Giraldi’s Disdemona claims that ‘Moors have such a hot tem-
perament that any little matter moves [them] to anger and vendetta’ (see
App. C, p. 439). As Floyd-Wilson points out, contemporary opinion was
divided on this issue: against the simple notion that hot climates naturally
produced hot temperaments, humoral theory had traditionally main-
tained that excessive exposure to the sun in southern climes drew out the
body’s natural heat and moisture, leaving it cool and dry, but with an
excess of black bile that darkened the skin and induced a melancholic dis-
position. Theorists disagreed, however, as to whether this would render
southern peoples more or less liable to jealousy: Desdemona echoes the
traditional view that their ‘complexion’ made southerners typically con-
stant and dispassionate; but this ran counter to the supposedly ﬁrst-hand
observation of travellers such as Leo Africanus, who remarked on the
extraordinary jealousy of Moors and other Africans. Shakespeare may
also have been aware of the inﬂuential work of Jean Bodin, who modiﬁed
humoral theory to accord with Leo’s observations. Remarking that ‘south-
erners, who are full of bile, are said to be more inclined to passion’, Bodin
argued that whilst their emotions were slow to waken, once aroused they
were difﬁcult to mollify and inclined to excess: ‘Because self-control was
difﬁcult, particularly when plunging into lust, they gave themselves over
to horrible excesses. Promiscuous coition of men and animals took place,
wherefore the regions of Africa produce for us so many monsters. Hence
is derived that unbelievable jealousy of the southerners . . . referred to in Leo’
(Bodin, pp. 105–6; emphasis added). By 1621, Robert Burton could cite
Bodin and Leo together in support of the claim that ‘Southern men are
more hot, lascivious, and jealous, than such as live in the North; they can
hardly contain themselves in these hotter climes, but are most subject to
prodigious lusts. Leo Afer [Africanus] telleth incredible things almost of
the lust and jealousy of his Countrymen of Africa’ (Anatomy, 3.3.1.2,
p. 827).
3.4.73 mummy Originally prepared from the bituminous remains
of mummiﬁed corpses, but by Shakespeare’s time frequently concocted
from other sources, including the bodies of condemned criminals. It was
credited with both medical and magical properties, notably by Paracelsus,
who believed that good quality mumia could restore the failing spirits of the
sick by infusing them with the life-power of the deceased. Though pre-
scribed for a wide variety of ailments, it was (interestingly, in view of Oth-
ello’s ﬁt in 4.1) celebrated for its anti-epileptic virtues. Shakespeare’s
son-in-law John Hall records its use in a ‘fume’ to be inhaled at the onset of

                                      466
                                Appendix F

a ﬁt (Select Observations on English Bodies, Observation 29). See also Louise
Noble, ‘The Fille Vièrge as Pharmakon: The Therapeutic Value of Desde-
mona’s Corpse’, in Disease, Diagnosis and Cure on the Early Modern Stage,
ed. Stephanie Moss and Kaara Peterson (Burlington, 2004), pp. 115–31;
and ‘ “And make two pasties of your shameful heads”: Medicinal Canni-
balism and Healing the Body Politic in Titus Andronicus’, ELH 70 (2003),
677–708.
69 maidens’ hearts The high demand for mummy meant that it was no
longer derived exclusively from ancient mummies, but could be prepared
from any human remains; those of saints or healthy young people were
especially effective, according to Paracelsus. Several authorities vouched
for the peculiar efﬁcacy of mummy extracted from the corpses of virgins,
the magical power of whose virginity was presumably concentrated in
their pure hearts. In John Davies of Hereford’s Microcosmos (1601) jeal-
ousy is described as ‘A sore which nought that’s good for aught recures, |
That’s mummy made of the mere heart of love’ (Complete Works, ed.
Grosart, p. 77); so, ironically enough, the embroidery on the handkerchief
may contain a charm against jealousy. Cf. also 3.3.436.
5.2.0.1 in her bed The fullest account of the staging of this scene is in
Siemon. Various suggestions have been made as to what may have hap-
pened at the Globe: the bed could have been ‘discovered’, either (a) in a
curtained ‘discovery space’ let into the tiring-house wall, or (b) inside a
curtained booth which might also have served as a ‘bulk’ in the previous
scene (see 5.1.1), as L. J. Ross suggested (‘The use of a “ﬁt-up” booth in
Othello’, SQ 12 (1961), 359–70). Alternatively, as Richard Hosley argued
in rebuttal, it could have been ‘put forth’ on to the stage through one of
the tiring-house doors, like the bed in Contention (2 Henry VI), 3.2.146.1
(‘The staging of Desdemona’s bed’, SQ 14 (1963), 57–65). Dessen and
Thompson’s study of more than 150 examples leads them to conclude
that ‘[m]ost signals are for beds to be brought onstage’, although at least
twenty call for the bed to be ‘discovered’. Nowhere is a booth explicitly
called for, however, and though its use in scenes of ‘discovery’ cannot be
excluded, it would create unnecessary staging difﬁculties, interfering with
the sightlines of a signiﬁcant portion of the audience in the galleries.
Alan C. Dessen and Leslie Thompson, A Dictionary of Stage Directions in
English Drame, 1580–1642 (Cambridge, 1999).




                                    467
This page intentionally left blank
                                     INDEX


This is a selective guide to words and phrases glossed in the Commentary, and to
names and topics in the Introduction, Commentary and Appendices A, B, D and F.
Information supplementary to OED and citations of ﬁrst recorded use are indicated
by asterisks. Biblical, liturgical, and theological allusions are grouped together, as
are proverbial usages.

a 4.3.38                                     alabaster 5.2.5
abhor 4.2.142                                alarum 2.3.24
abode 4.2.225                                Albanese, Denise p. 67
abuse 5.1.122                                Alchemist see Jonson
abused 1.1.172; 2.1.226; 3.3.203             Aldridge, Amanda p. 54
abuser 1.2.78                                Aldridge, Ira pp. 10–11, 15, 42, 43,
accident(s) 1.1.141; 5.1.94                        50–2, 54, 57
accomodation 1.3.237                         Aleppo 5.2.351
account 1.3.5                                alﬁeri p. 194
accountant 2.1.284                           allowance 1.1.126; 2.1.50
accumulate 372                               allowed 1.3.223
Acephali p. 463                              All’s Well that Ends Well 1.3.255;
acerb 1.3.342; p. 428                              4.1.116; pp. 401, 402
achieved 2.1.61                              Almain 2.3.75
acknown 3.3.322                              alteration 5.2.103
acquaintance 2.1.198; 4.2.190                amazed 3.3.373; 4.2.238
act 3.3.330                                  amiable 3.4.58
act divisions pp. 429, 431                   Amneus, Daniel 5.2.85
Act to Restrain Abuses pp. 411, 413,         anagnorisis p. 135
     418, 427, 429                           anatomy 3.3.119
action 1.3.71; 2.3.56                        and 2.3.81
actors’ alterations pp. 425, 427–8, 431      Angelo 1.3.16
addiction 2.2.6                              Angelus Sorianus p. 400
addition 3.4.189; 4.1.100; 4.2.163           Anikst, Alexander p. 105
additons (to the play) see cuts              Anne, Queen p. 400
Adelman, Janet p. 120; 2.1.287               anon 4.1.76; 4.3.45
Adler, Doris p. 63                           answer 1.1.118; 1.3.275
adultery pp. 145–6                           answerable 1.3.339
advantage 1.3.295; 3.3.315; 4.2.179          antres p. 140
advocation 3.4.119                           Anthropophagi 1.3.144; p. 463
aerial 2.1.40                                Antony and Cleopatra pp. 2, 131;
affection 2.1.234; 4.3.93                          1.1.65; 3.3.450; 3.4.34–6, 54–64;
affects 1.3.261–2                                  4.1.237; 4.2.61; 5.2.282
afﬁned 2.3.209                               apartheid pp. 63–4
afﬁnity 3.1.46                               Aphrodite 2.1.200
after 1.3.36                                 appeared 4.2.209–10
against 2.3.361                              appetite 2.3.332
Agate, James pp. 54–5, 78, 82                apprehensions 3.3.143
agnize 1.3.230                               approve 1.1.78; 2.1.45; 2.3.58; 4.3.10
aim 1.3.6                                    approved in 2.3.202

                                        469
                                        Index

apt 2.1.278; 2.3.307                       Bate, Jonathan p. 8
Arden of Faversham pp. 114, 174            bauble 4.1.130
argues 3.4.36                              Baughan, E. A. p. 54
Ariosto, Ludovico p. 17; 3.4.71            bawd 4.2.20
Aristotle 5.2.208                          Beale, Simon Russell pp. 88, 95, 96–9;
arithmetician 1.1.18                            4.1.43
Armin, Robert p. 72; 3.3.447               beam 1.3.322
Armstrong, Louis p. 59                     Bear 2.1.14
arrivance 2.1.43                           bear it out 2.1.18
article 3.3.22; 5.2.56                     Beattie, Maureen p. 109
As You Like It 3.3.24; p. 403              Beaumont and Fletcher pp. 407, 426
ashamed 2.3.153                            bed pp. 131, 173–4; 3.3.415;
Ashcroft, Peggy pp. 53, 55, 104                 4.1.247–8; 4.3.20; 5.2.0.1, 106.1,
Ashe, Oscar 5.2.357–8                           250.1, 363–4.1; p. 467
aspics 3.3.450                             bed and board 3.3.24
ass 1.1.47                                 before 2.1.106
assay 1.3.19; 2.1.120                      before me 4.1.140
assigned 1.1.38                            begrimed 3.3.389
at a time 2.3.301                          beguile pp. 1.3.67, 156; 2.1.122
at fortune 3.3.266                         Behn, Aphra pp. 15, 41
at stake 4.2.13                            belch 3.4.102
Atkins, Robert 5.2.357–8                   beleed 1.1.29
atone 4.1.225                              bending 1.3.234
attach 1.2.77                              beneﬁt 3.4.115
Attenborough, Michael pp. 66, 99,          Benson, Frank pp. 11, 74
      100                                  Benthall, Nichael p. 79
attend 3.4.188                             Berbers 1.1.111
attending 1.1.51                           Berger, Harry pp. 133–4
attends 3.1.24                             Berger, Thomas L. pp. 405, 406
aubade pp. 448–9                           Bernard, John pp. 10, 80
Auden, W. H. p. 92                         Bertish, Suzanne pp. 105, 106
avaunt 3.3.337                             beshrew 3.4.146
away 4.2.44–5                              besort 1.3.237
                                           Best, George p. 126
baboon 1.3.312                             better angel 5.2.206
Bacon, Francis pp. 127, 149, 1.2.213       betimes 1.3.367
Baker, Sean p. 111                         Betterton, Thomas pp. 45, 47, 74,
balk 5.1.1                                      79
Balm of Gilead 5.2.349–50                  *bewhored 4.2.115
balmy 5.2.16                               Bible, Geneva 1.1.112; p. 465
Balthasar (of the Three Magi) pp. 26,        Great p. 465
     127                                     Matthew p. 465
Bandello, Matteo p. 20                     biblical, liturgical, and theological
Bannen, Ian p. 85                               allusions (including homilies)
banning 2.1.11                                  1.1.47, 112; 1.2.59; 1.3.342;
barbarian 1.3.349                               2.1.85, 290; 2.3.66, 284–5;
Barbary 1.1.111; 1.3.349; 4.3.24                3.3.120, 269, 462.1; 3.4.108;
Barber, John pp. 60, 62, 93, 94                 4.1.8, 137, 226; 4.2.16, 47–53,
Barry, Spranger pp. 10, 80                      57–62; 4.3.69–70; 5.2.21–2, 41,
Bartels, Emily p. 115                           48, 55, 76, 101–3, 194, 205,
Barthelemy, Anthony pp. 115, 122                278–9, 346–7, 349–50, 363;
Barton, John pp. 60–1, 89–90, 111               pp. 464–5
base 2.1.210; 5.2.346                      big 3.3.351

                                        470
                                       Index

Billington, Michael pp. 64, 91, 93, 95,      brave 5.1.32
      99, 100, 105, 107                      brave v. 5.2.325
birdlime 2.1.126                             bravery 1.1.101
black 1.3.288; 2.1.131, 132–3                Brayton, Lily p. 104
blackness (see also colour) 1.1.88, 112,     breed 3.3.16
      139; 1.2.63, 66; 1.3.250;              breeding 2.1.98
      2.1.132–3; 3.3.447;                    Brewster, Yvonne p. 68
      4.2.74–5; 5.2.155; p. 400              bridal 3.4.146
Blackfriars playhouse pp. 2, 406, 429        Brien, Alan pp. 58, 59, 77, 87, 88
Blake, Peter p. 37                           brimstone 4.1.116
Bland, Joyce p. 104                          bring 3.4.194
Bland, Sheila Rose p. 71                     bring you in 3.1.50
blank 3.4.124                                Bristol, Michael pp. 5, 448
Blayney, Peter pp. 407, 408                  Brome, Alexander 2.1.132
blazoning 2.1.63                             Brown, Ivor pp. 55, 77, 78
Blemmyae p. 463                              Brown, John Russell p. 36
blotted 5.1.36                               bruised 1.3.218
blown 3.3.185                                Bryant, Michael p. 91
blood 1.1.168; 1.3.105, 124, 323;            Bryden, Ronald pp. 58, 60, 61, 62, 90
      2.3.196; 3.3.330, 451–78;              Buchowetski, Dmitri p. 53
      4.1.267; 5.1.37                        bulk 1.3.0.1; 5.1.1; p. 467
Boaden, James p. 80                          Bullough, Geoffrey pp. 18, 22
board 3.3.24                                 Bulwer, John 2.1.216
boarded 1.2.50                               Burbage, Richard pp. 47, 71
bobbed 5.1.16                                Burge, Stuart pp. 59, 88
Bodin, Jean p. 145; 1.3.340–1; p. 466        Burke, Kenneth p. 143
Bohler, Danielle Régnier p. 130              burlesques, see travesties
Boitard, François Boitard p. 37–8            Burnett, Mark Thornton p. 139
Boito, Arrigo p. 15                          Burton, Robert 5.2.38; p. 466
bold cure 2.1.51–2                           Burton, Richard p. 79
bolster 3.3.401                              business 1.3.269
bombast 1.1.12                               busy 3.3.257; 4.2.131
bondslaves 1.2.99                            but 3.4.24
Boose, Linda pp. 123, 136, 155;              but that 5.2.136
      5.2.143                                Butler, Robert p. 98
Booth, Edwin pp. 75–7, 82, 96, 113;          butt 5.2.266
      4.2.130–44; 5.2.126, 129–30,           by and by 2.1.274; 5.2.93
      5.2.280.1–2, 288                       by my troth 4.3.66
Booth, Junius Brutus p. 75                   by this hand 4.1.130–1; 4.1.169
bootless 1.3.208                             Byron, Lord pp. 10, 130
Bosch, Hieronymus p. 155
bound 3.1.55; 3.3.216; 5.2.182               cable 1.2.17
Bowers, Fredson p. 412                       Caesar, Julius 2.3.113
Boy Musician 3.1.5                           caitiff 4.1.105
Boyd, Michael p. 69                          Calder, David pp. 94–5, 111
Boydell, Josiah pp. 39, 135–6                Calderwood, James pp. 136, 140,
brace 2.3.27                                       1.1.157
Bradley, A. C. pp. 7, 40, 103–4, 114,        Callaghan, Dympna p. 70
      117, 118, 171                          callet 4.2.121
Bradshaw, Graham pp. 6, 34–5, 137;           Canada, Ron pp. 67, 89, 110
      1.1.20; 3.3.332–5; 4.1.112             cannibals pp. 20, 145; 1.3.143; p. 463
Branagh, Kenneth pp. 68, 88, 89              cannikin 2.3.63
Brathwait, Richard p. 166                    capable 3.3.459

                                           471
                                     Index

Capell, Edward 1.3.45, 48.1–2           clime 3.3.234
capo di squadra p. 194                  clip 3.3.464
caps 4.3.69                             close 3.3.127; 5.2.334
Caribs 1.3.143                          closet 4.2.22
Carlin, Murray pp. 1, 11–12             Cloutier, Suzanne p. 104
Carné, Marcel p. 9                      clown 3.1.0
carrack 1.2.50                          clyster-pipes 2.1.174
Carrington, Ethel p. 104                coat(s) 1.1.53; 5.1.25
carry 1.1.67                            Cockpit playhouse p. 9
carve 2.3.164                           coffers 2.1.203
Cary, Elizabeth p. 465                  cogging 4.2.132
cashiered 1.1.48; 2.3.360               Coghill, Nevill 4.3.24–9; pp. 413–14,
Cashin, Fergus p. 59                          416, 421–2
cast 1.1.148; 2.3.14; 5.2.325–6         Cohen, Derek p. 137
cast water 2.1.14                       ‘collaring scene’ 3.3.362.1
castigation 3.4.39                      coldness 2.3.373
Castiglione, Baldassare p. 450          Coleridge, S. T. pp. 31, 42, 45, 47, 54,
catechize 3.4.15                              98, 113, 114, 146, 152; 1.3.377;
cause 1.2.95; 3.3.28; 3.3.413;                4.1.100
      5.2.1–2, 1                        collied 2.3.197
Cavell, Stanley pp. 5, 134, 135         Collier, J. P. pp. 72, 194
censorship p. 410                       coloquintida 1.3.343
censure 2.3.184; 4.1.262; 5.2.367       colour (see also blackness) pp. 1, 16,
centaur 1.1.57                                23, 40–71, 85, 113–30, 142–3,
certain 2.2.2                                 146–7, 178; 1.1.202; 1.2.99
certes 1.1.15                           Columbus, Christopher 1.3.224;
chair 5.1.82                                  p. 464
Chakravarti, Paromita p. 13             come in 5.1.45
challenge 1.3.187; 2.1.206              Comedy of Errors p. 33
chamberers 3.3.268                      comforts 4.2.190
Chambers, E. K. p. 421                  comic convention pp. 4–6, 28–9;
chaos 3.3.93                                  4.1.70, 122–204
charge 5.1.119                          committed 4.2.70
Charles I, King p. 3                    common thing 3.3.305
charm your tongue 5.2.181               commoner 4.2.73
charmer 3.4.56                          commonly 3.4.41
charms 1.1.170; 5.1.36                  companions 4.2.141
charter 1.3.244                         compass 2.1.234; 3.4.19; 4.2.219
check(s) 1.1.147; 3.3.67–8; 4.3.18      compasses 3.4.70
choler 2.1.263                          compassing 1.3.353
christened 1.1.29                       complete 2.1.240
chuck 3.4.47                            complexion 3.3.234; 4.2.62
Churchill, Sir Winston p. 62            comply 1.3.261
chrysolite 5.2.143                      composition 1.3.1
Cibber, Colley pp. 72, 78, 79           Compositor B pp. 415, 432
Circe 2.3.280–1                         Compositor E p. 415
circumstance 1.1.12; 3.3.356, 408       compulsive
circumstanced 3.4.196                   conceit 3.3.118; 328
cistern 4.2.61                          conceive 4.2.96
civil 2.3.181; 4.1.60                   conception 5.2.57
Clapp, Susannah pp. 97, 99, 109         conclusion 1.3.325; 2.1.159; 3.3.429
Clark, Austin p. 68                     conﬁne 1.2.27
Clarke, Mary Cowden 4.1.338             congregated sands 2.1.69

                                     472
                                    Index

conjects 3.3.153                          cries on 5.1.49
conjunctive 1.3.360                       crocodile 4.1.237
conjured 1.3.106; 3.3.295                 crusadoes 3.4.24
conduct n. 2.1.75                         cry 2.3.349; 5.1.45
Conrad, Joseph p. 69                      cry you mercy 4.2.89; 5.1.68
consent in 5.2.295                        Cukor, George p. 8
construe 4.1.97                           Cumaean sibyl 3.4.69–70
consuls 1.1.24, 1.2.43                    cunning 3.3.49
Contarini, Cardinal Gasparo pp. 18,       cunning’st 5.2.11
     158                                  Cupid 1.3.266–7
content 2.3.1; 3.3.450                    Curtis, Nick p. 100
continuate 3.4.173                        Cusack, Niamh p. 106
contrived 1.2.3                           Cushman, Robert pp. 60, 92
conveniences 2.1.225–6                    Cushman, Charlotte p. 102
conveniency 4.2.178                       *customer 4.1.116
conversation 3.3.267                      cuts and additions 1.3.25–31; 3.3.327,
conveyance 1.3.283                             3.3.385–92, 453–60; 4.1.44–177;
convinced 4.1.27                               4.2.151–64; 4.3.24–9, 29–48,
Cooke, George Frederick p. 74                  81–98, 100; 5.2.245–7, 265–71;
Cooke, William p. 79                           pp. 410, 417, 421, 426, 431
cope 4.1.82                               Cymbeline 1.3.166; 3.3.460; 5.2.4
corner 3.3.275                            Cyprus p. 148, 1.1.28; 2.1.200; p. 400
Cornwallis, Sir William 3.4.44–5
corrigible 1.3. 321                       daily 5.1.19
corrupted 1.3.61                          Dale, Janet pp. 107, 109
Coryat, Tomas p. 194                      dam 4.1.143
couch 4.3.52                              D’Amico, Jack pp. 121–2
Couling, Barbara p. 94                    Danaë 4.3.83
counsel 3.3.114; 4.2.95                   Daniel, Samuel p. 130
count 5.2.272                             Danson, Lawrence 2.3.161–2
counter-caster p. 30                      Darlington, W. A. pp. 82, 85
country 3.3.241                           Davenant, Sir William p. 47
country forms 3.3.241                     David, Richard p. 58
course(s) 1.2.86; 1.3.112; 3.4.69–70;     Davies, Andrew p. 7
     4.1.271; 4.2.94                      Davies, Edward p. 32; 2.3.130, 254–5;
coursers 1.1.112                               p. 462
court of guard 2.1.212; 2.3.207           Davies, John (‘of Hereford’) p. 467
courtesans p. 194                         Davis, Willy p. 13
courtesy 2.1.99, 172                      daws 1.1.65
courtship 2.1.168                         Day, Angel 4.2.22
cousins 1.1.112                           Day of Judgement 5.2.272
Coveney, Michael pp. 62, 69, 93, 95,      dear 2.1.282
     96, 107                              de Botton, Alain p. 150
covered 1.1.111                           de Bry, Theodor pp. 20, 21, 463
Cowhig, Ruth p. 41                        defend 1.3.264
coxcomb 5.2.232                           defunct 1.3.259–63, 262
cozening 4.2.132                          degree 3.3.234
crack of 2.3.322–12                       de Jongh, Nicholas pp. 93, 94, 99, 100
Crane, Ralph pp. 193, 419–21, 427,        Dekker, Thomas 3.4.5–6; p. 400
     429                                  delicate 1.3.347; 2.1.226; 3.3.272
creature 2.3.297                          delighted 1.3.287; 4.2.155
credit 1.3.2, 98; 2.1.278; 2.3.344        Delius, Nicolaus 2.1.11, 208–9
cries 1.3.274                             demerits 1.2.22

                                        473
                                         Index

demonstrable 3.4.138                        disrelish 2.1.227
demonstrate 3.3.432                         distaste 3.3.329
Dennis, John p. 72                          distempering 1.1.100
denote 4.1.171                              distinctly 3.3.239
denotement 2.3.305                          distract it with 1.3.319
Dent, Alan pp. 77, 83, 84, 87               divesting 2.3.172
deputing 4.1.229                            divine p. 211
Desdemon 4.2.41; 5.2.25                     divinity of hell 2.3.335
deserve 1.1.182                             division of a battle 1.1.22
designment 2.1.22                           do 2.3.309; 3.3.1; 3.3.433
desired 2.1.199                             do my duties 3.2.2
desperate 2.1.21; 5.2.205                   Doctor Faustus see Marlowe,
despite 4.2.116                                  Christopher
Dessen, Alan C. p. 467                      Dod, John and Cleaver, Robert p. 162
determinate 4.2.227                         does 4.2.166
de Vigny, Alfred p. 10                      doffest 4.2.176
device 4.2.176                              domestic 2.3.206
Dexter, John pp. 5, 57–8, 85, 88, 89,       Domingo, Placido p. 65
      90, 117                               done 4.3.67
diablo 2.3.151                              done our course 4.2.94
dial 3.4.170                                Donne, John p. 162
Dickins, Richard p. 77                      dotage 4.1.26
dictated scripts pp. 424–5, 431             dote 2.1.201
diet 2.1.285                                double 1.3.383
Digges, Leonard (Stratioticos) pp. 71;      double negatives 3.4.183
      1.1.18, 41–65; 2.3.130, 254–5;        ‘double time’ see time scheme
      p. 462                                doubt 3.3.19, 182–3, 191, 430
Digges, Thomas 1.1.18                       Downes, Cathy p. 69
dilate 1.3.153                              dram 1.3.106
dilations 3.3.127                           dreadful 2.3.166
dilatory 2.3.358                            drinning songs pp. 446–8
dinner 3.3.59                               driving in (sd.) 2.3.135.1
direction 1.3.297                           Drury, Alan p. 91
directly 2.1.213; 4.2.208                   Dryden, John 4.3.68
dirt 5.2.162                                Duberman, Martin N. p. 56
discipline 2.1.259                          Ducis, François pp. 10, 14, 41–2
discontented 5.2.313                        dull 1.1.122; 2.1.221; 5.2.224
discords 2.1.194                            dull v. 2.3.373
discover 1.1.177                            dullness 1.3.267
discovery pp. 130–8, 178; 3.3.409           Dumas, Alexandre (père) pp. 10, 87
discreet 2.1.219                            Dunderdale, Sue pp. 69, 106
discretion 3.3.32                           duties 4.3.82
Disdemona p. 194                            Dutch 2.3.69–76
disembark 2.1.203                           Dyce, Alexander 3.3.388; 5.2.86
dislikes 2.3.43
dismayed 5.2.268                            easily 5.1.82
displanting 2.1.267                         ecstasy 4.1.75
displeasure 3.1.42                          Eden, Richard p. 463
disports 1.3.269                            ediﬁed 3.4.13education 1.3.181
dispose n. 1.3.386                          Edwardes, Jane p. 97
disposition 1.3.235                         Edwards, Christopher p. 69
disproportion p. 147; 3.3.296               Egyptian 3.4.55
disproportioned 1.2.2                       elements 2.3.53, 326–7; 3.3.464

                                         474
                                     Index

Eliot, T. S. pp. 60, 74                     extend 2.1.98
Elizabeth, Princess p. 3                    extincted 2.1.81
Elizabeth, Queen p. 399                     extravagant 1.1.135
Ellis, Ruth pp. 10, 84                      extremity 5.2.139
else 5.2.136                                eyes (see also ocular proof) 1.1.27;
embarked 1.1.148                                 1.3.268; 4.2.35–6; 5.2.38
embayed 2.1.18                              Eyre, Ronald pp. 90, 105, 107, 111
*encave 4.1.77                              Eyres, Harry pp. 95, 96
enchafed 2.1.17
enchanted 1.1.63                            fain 4.1.160
endues 3.4.142                              faintly 4.1.109
enemy 2.3.279                               fair 1.1.66; 1.3.114–15; 2.1.129;
*enfettered 2.3.330                               3.3.478
engage 3.3.462                              fall 4.3.82
engines 4.2.216                             fall into 3.3.226
Engler, Balz 2.1.153; 5.2.360               fall to match 3.3.241
English 2.3.69–76                           fall out 4.2.235
English Courtier, The p. 161                false 5.2.134
engluts 1.3.58                              false gaze 1.3.20
*enmesh 2.3.347                             familiar 2.3.297
ensign pp. 30, 151; 1.1.32, 155;            fancies 3.3.89; 3.4.62
      pp. 461–3                             fancy 4.2.26
ensteeped 2.1.70                            fantasy 3.3.302
entertainment 2.3.32; 3.3.254               Farjeon, Herbert pp. 54, 55
enwheel 2.1.87                              fast 1.2.11; 1.3.355
epilepsy 3.3.287; 4.1.47                    fasten 2.3.44
epithets of war 1.1.13                      fatal 52.20
equinox 2.3.115                             Fates 5.2.204
equivocal 1.3.216                           fathom 1.1.151
Erne, Lukas p. 421                          favour 2.1.223; 3.4.121
err 1.3.63                                  Fay, Gerard p. 54
erring 1.3.348                              fear 1.2.71
error 5.2.111                               Fearon, Ray pp. 57, 64, 99–100
estimation 1.3.272                          Fechter, Charles pp. 49, 108;
eternal 4.2.130                                   4.2.130–44; 5.2.129–30
ethic dative 1.1.49; 2.3.74; 3.4.175;       fell 5.2.361
      4.2.133                               fellow 4.2.140
evades 1.1.12                               fellowship 2.1.93
Evans, Gareth Lloyd pp. 60, 62, 90, 91      Fenton, Geoffrey pp. 20, 92
Evans, K. W. p. 122                         Ferrer, José pp. 9, 141
Evans, Robert C. p. 168                     ﬁeld 1.3.135
Everett, Barbara pp. 115, 116, 150, 194     ﬁg 1.3.315
ever-ﬁxed 2.1.15                            ﬁg’s end 2.1.244
ewe 1.1.89                                  ﬁlls it up 3.3.250–1
execute 2.3.219                             ﬁlthy 5.2.155
execution 3.3.466                           ﬁneless 3.3.176
exercise 3.4.39                             Fineman, Joel 5.2. 289
exhibition 1.3.236; 4.3.69                  Finlay, Frank pp. 36, 59, 86–8
expectancy 2.1.42                           Fishburne, Laurence p. 68
expedition 1.3.227                          ﬁtchew 4.1.141
expostulate 4.1.198                         ﬂag and sign 1.1.155
exquisite 2.3.18; 2.3.73                    ﬂeers 4.1.78
exsufﬁlate 3.3.185; p. 464                  Fletcher, John 3.3.446

                                          475
                                    Index

Fletcher, Phineas p. 165                 *futurity 3.4.113
ﬂood 2.1.2                               Fyfe, Christopher p. 9
ﬂood-gate 1.3.57
Florentine 1.1.19; 3.1.40                gained 1.3.373
Florio, John pp. 194, 464                Galenic medicine 1.3.340–1; 3.4.139;
Floyd-Wilson, Mary pp. 127, 128, 129;         p. 466
      1.3.316, 340–1; 2.3.197; p. 466    gall 1.1.147; 1.3.215
foaming 2.1.11                           galls 4.3.87
follow 1.1.40                            game 2.1.222; 2.3.19
folly 2.1.136; 5.2.132                   Gandhi, M. K. p. 62
fond 1.3.314; 3.3.446; 4.1.191           garb 2.1.297
foolish 2.1.134–5                        Garrick, David pp. 73, 79; 5.2.91
footing 2.1.76                           Gascoigne, Bamber p. 83–4, 84–5, 88,
fopped 4.2.195                                89
for 1.3.266; 3.3.156                     Gascoigne, George p. 465
for that 1.3.25; 2.3.303                 gastness 5.1.105
Ford, John p. 14; 3.3.166                Gautier, Théophile p. 57
foregone 3.3.429                         gay 2.1.148
forehead 3.3.287                         Geary, David p. 13
forfend 5.2.32                           Geelan, Christopher p. 61
forswear 4.2.159                         gender 1.3.319
fortitude 1.3.221                        gender v. 4.2.62
forth 5.1.36                             general p. 194; 1.3.50, 55; 2.3.302–3;
found him 2.1.241                             p. 461
fountain 4.2.61                          general camp 3.3.347
fordoes 5.1.128                          generous 3.3.283
forked 3.3.279                           Genster, Julia pp. 32, 462
form 4.2.155                             gentle 1.2.25; 1.3.51; 4.1.187
Forrest, Edwin pp. 8, 44, 49, 102, 110   Gentleman, Francis pp. 38–9, 101, 102
Foucault, Michel p. 123                  Gerard, John 1.3.342, 343
foul 1.2.62; 1.3.118; 1.3.139–40         Germans 2.3.69–76
‘foul papers’ pp. 412, 413,              germans 1.1.113
frail 2.1.152                            gesture 4.1.83
frailty 4.3.94                           get 1.3.190
frankly 2.3.286                          Ghazoul, Ferial p. 13
fraught 3.3.449                          Gielgud, Sir John pp. 57, 83, 84–6,
free 1.3.42, 211–12, 263, 388;                88
      2.3.307, 322; 3.3.188, 202, 259,   Gildon, Charles pp. 72, 73, 124
      342                                Giraldi Cinthio, Giovanni Battista
freely 2.3.315; 5.2.55                        pp. 20–32, 33, 158, 179, 183, 193,
Freeman, Morgan p. 98                         194; 1.3.253–8, 383–5; 2.1.16,
fresh 3.3.388                                 279–82, 282; 2.3.240; 3.3.0,
friend 3.3.146, 382; 3.4.176                  42–75, 186–8, 196–200, 233–7,
frieze 2.1.126                                361–5, 399–410, 434–6; 3.4.28–9,
from 1.1.130                                  49–95, 68; 4.1.89–163, 164–206,
full 4.1.256                                  193–202; 5.1.71; 5.2.59, 123,
full soldier 2.1.37                           299–300, 368; pp. 400, 461, 462,
fulsome 4.1.34                                465
function 2.3.333; 4.2.27–9               give away 3.3.28
Furness, H. H. pp. 8, 45, 47, 72, 114,   Globe playhouse p. 2; 1.1.139;
      135, 142; 1.1.20; 1.3.259–63;           5.2.102; pp. 399, 406
      5.2.76, 91                         Globe (rebuilt) p. 424
fustian 2.3.270                          glorious 3.3.356

                                     476
                                    Index

go to 1.3.367; 4.1.163; 4.2.148          half asleep 4.2.98
go to v. 4.2.193                         Hall, John p. 466
goat 3.3.182–3, 405                      Hall, Joseph p. 120
goats and monkeys 4.1.255                Hall, Kim p. 123
God bless the mark 1.1.32                Hall, Peter pp. 90, 91–2
God by you 3.3.377                       halter 4.2.136
Godwyn, Morgan p. 124                    halts 2.1.23
Goethe, J. W. von p. 1                   Hamilton, Charles p. 399
gone 3.3.270                             Hamlet pp. 1, 36, 132, 160; 1.1.46;
good 2.1.96–9                                 1.3.6, 188; 2.3.69–76, 144;
goodbye 1.3.88                                3.1.16–17; 3.3.204, 331, 446,
good morrow 3.1.2                             447; 4.1.20–1, 249; 4.2.54;
Gouge, William pp. 161, 163, 164, 165,        4.3.26–7, 83; pp. 400, 401, 402,
     167                                      403, 409, 411, 423
government 3.3.260; 4.1.229              hand and heart 3.3.466; 3.4.34–6,
gown 1.1.86                                   44–5
grace 3.3.46; 4.3.87; 5.2.27             handkerchief pp. 4, 23, 98, 155, 174;
grace and favour 4.3.19                       3.4.54–64, 89–91, 99–102;
graces 2.3.305                                5.2.215
Grainger, Percy p. 451                   Hands, Terry pp. 17, 62, 91, 93–4, 107,
grange 1.1.106                                421
Grant, Ulysses S. p. 15                  hang clogs p. 227
Gratiano 1.1.174; 5.2.199                Hankey, Julie pp. 8, 9, 10, 14, 15, 36,
gratify 5.2.211                               47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 58, 71, 72, 73,
*graze 4.1.260                                75, 76, 79, 80, 94, 102
great of heart 5.2.360                   Hanmer, Thomas p. 464
grece 1.3.199                            haply 2.1.263
green-eyed 3.3.169                       happily 3.3.242
Greene, Robert 2.3.81–8; 3.3.331         happy 1.2.66
Greg, W. W. pp. 412, 427                 hardness 1.3.231–2; 3.4.32
grievance 1.2.15                         Harewood pp. 57, 64, 65, 98–9, 100;
Grifﬁn, Eric p. 116                           1.2.22; 5.2.355
gripe 3.3.422                            harlotry 4.2.233
gross 1.1.133; 1.1.72; 3.3.406           harmony pp. 450, 453
Gross, John pp. 97, 98                   Harris, Bernard p. 116
grows to waste 4.2.241–2                 Harrow, Lisa p. 36, 105
guardage 1.2.70                          Hart, Alfred p. 401
Guazzo, Steffano p. 162                  Hart, H. C. 3.4.5–6; 5.2.355
guinea-hen 1.3.311                       Harvey, Brian pp. 83, 89
gull 5.2.161                             Havens, Richie p. 15
gum 5.2.349–50                           have with you 1.2.53
Gurr, Andrew pp. 408, 410, 421, 423,     having 4.3.86
     424                                 Hawkins, Richard p. 407
Guthrie, Tyrone p. 78                    Hazlitt, William p. 80
guttered 2.1.69                          head and front 1.3.81
gyve 2.1.167                             heart see hand and heart
                                         heart-strings 3.3.264
Hagen, Uta pp. 9, 36                     hearted 1.3.359
haggard 3.3.263                          heat 1.2.40; 1.3.261
Haines, Charles pp. 137, 155             heathenish 5.2.312
Haines, Richard Haddon p. 64             heave the gorge 2.1.227
Hakluyt, Richard p. 463                  heavy 1.3.256; 2.1.142; 4.2.116;
Hale, J. R. 3.4.124                           5.1.43; 5.2.100

                                     477
                                       Index

Hedgecock, Frank p. 79                           pp. 399, 401, 402, 403, 406, 407,
hell 4.2.92–3                                    409, 414, 415, 416–22, 424, 427,
Hellespont 3.3.453–6, 456                        429, 430, 432, 464, 465
helped 2.1.136                              Hope-Wallace, Philip p. 57
Heminge and Condell pp. 409, 413,           Hopkins, Sir Anthony pp. 60, 92
      431                                   Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus)
Hendricks, Margo p. 123                          p. 41
Henrietta Maria, Queen p. 3                 Hornback, Robert p. 5
2 Henry IV 1.3.363; p.462                   Horne, Michael p. 422
Henry V 1.2.28; pp. 402, 423, 462           horned 4.1.58
1 Henry VI 1.3.188, 255; 2.3.135.1          Hosley, Richard p. 467
2. Henry VI (Contention) 5.2.362            Hoskins, Bob pp. 89, 92
Heywood, Jasper 3.3.447                     hot 3.3.405–6; 3.4.37
Heywood, Thomas p. 26                       hotly 1.2.44
hideous 3.3.111                             housewives 1.3.270; 2.1.112
hie thee 4.3.45                             Howard-Hill, Trevor p. 414
hies 5.1.35                                 Hoyle, Martin p. 95
high 2.3.226; 4.1.183; 5.2.95               humane 2.1.233
high supper time 4.2.241                    humour 3.4.121
high-wrought 2.1.2                          humours (see also Galenic medicine)
Hill, Aaron p. 80; 5.2.38                        3.4.29
hinge 3.3.367                               Humphrey, Pelham p. 451
Hinman, Charlton pp. 181, 412, 414,         hungerly 3.4.101
      418                                   Hunt, Marsha p. 108
hint 1.3.142, 166                           Hunter, G. K. pp. 62–3, 117, 119–20,
Histrio-mastix see Marston, John                 121, 146; 3.4.71
Hobson, Harold pp. 58, 59, 83, 84, 89;      hurt your head 4.1.55
      3.3.460                               hussy 4.1.90
hoppy-horse 4.1.149                         hypocrisy against the devil 4.1.6
Hodgdon, Barbara pp. 64, 68                 Hydra 2.3.292
hold him 5.2.333
Holinshed, Raphael p. 114                   ice-brook’s temper 5.2.252
Holland, Philemon pp. 19, 399               *idle 1.2.95; 1.3.140
hollow mine 4.2.79                          ill-starred 5.2.271
homage 1.1.54                               ‘I.M.’ p. 165
home 2.1.163                                import 3.3.319; 4.2.31
honest pp. 160–2, 178; 1.3.292;             imports 4.1.133
      2.3.132, 322, 326; 3.3.104, 229,      importing 2.2.3
      386; 4.2.142; 5.1.120–2               imposition 2.3.260
honesty 1.3.282; 5.2.244                    impudent 4.2.81
Honigmann, Ernst pp. 17, 22, 34, 37,        in 3.3.341
      111, 116, 193, 1.1.4–7, 19,           in position 3.3.238
      130–26; 1.2.49–53, 59, 83;            in the nick 5.2.316
      1.3.166; 1.3.247, 316, 329–30,        incline 1.3.146
      367–71; 2.1.0.1, 3, 11, 15, 27, 85,   inclining 1.2.82; 2.3.325
      85–7, 96–9, 101; 2.1.129–47, 153,     incontinently 1.3.301
      290; 2.3.153–6, 280–1, 362;           incontinent 4.3.10
      3.3.158, 166, 283–4, 361–5, 447,      incorporate 2.1.254
      468; 3.4.69–70, 89–91; 4.1.3–4,       index 2.1.249
      61, 70, 124, 206.1, 214–16; 4.2.2,    Indian(s) p. 115; 5.2.346; pp. 464–5
      21–3, 64, 74–5, 112; 4.3.20, 33,      indign 1.3.271
      47–8, 60–2, 79–80; 5.1.60;            infectious 4.1.20
      5.2.33–4, 70, 72, 199, 218;           inference 3.3.186

                                        478
                                       Index

ingener 2.1.65                                  3.4.5–6; 4.1.124; 5.1.0; pp. 421,
ingraft 2.3.132                                 465
injointed p. 216                           Jordan, Thomas p. 465
innovation 2.3.36                          Jove (Jupiter) 2.3.17; 3.3.358
inordinate 2.3.295                         Jowett, John pp. 417, 420
insinuating 4.2.131                        Judas 1.2.59
instruction 4.1.38                         Judean pp. 464–5
insupportable 5.2.100                      judgement 1.3.9
intendment 4.2.202–3                       Julius Caesar 3.3.310
intentively p. 224                         jump 1.3.5; 2.3.371
inversion errors 2.3.158                   just 1.3.5
invisible 2.3.271                          Justice 5.2.17
Irving, Sir Henry pp. 71, 75–8, 102;       justly 1.3.125
     5.2.355
issues 3.3.222                             Kani, John pp. 63, 94
iterance 5.2.148                           Kean, Edmund pp. 10, 47, 54, 57, 73,
Iyengar, Suajata pp. 11, 55                     75, 80–1, 87, 113, 114; 3.3.174;
                                                4.1.0; 5.2.355
Jackson, C. Bernard pp. 13, 71             Kee, Robert p. 59
Jackson, Henry pp. 1, 9, 36, 71, 100–1,    keep 5.2.364–5
     135                                   keep time 4.1.88
Jackson, Macdonald pp. 402, 403,           keeps her company 4.2.137
     414–15, 417, 418, 420, 465            Kellner, Leon 1.1.57; 1.3.329–30;
Jacobi, Derek p. 111                            2.3.271; 5.2.85
Jaggard, Isaac p. 409                      Kelly, Jude pp. 66–7, 89, 109–10
Jaggard, William p. 409                    Kemble, Fanny pp. 49, 102
James, Emrys pp. 36, 90, 95                Kemble, John Philip pp. 45, 47, 72, 74,
James, Henry pp. 49, 83, 95                     79–80
James I (King) p. 18; 3.4.44–5;            Kendall, Felicity p. 105
     5.2.352–4; p. 399                     Kermode, Frank p. 6
Jannings, Emil p. 53                       Kerrigan, John 5.2.86; pp. 415–16
Janus 1.2.33                               kind 1.3.378; 2.3.307; 5.2.125
jealousy 3.3.151                           King, Francis p. 62
jennet 1.1.113                             King John 4.2.71–2
jesses 3.3.264                             King Lear pp. 1, 36, 156, 170, 171, 176;
Jew of Malta see Marlowe                        3.3.331, 405, 464; 4.2.92–3, 190,
John, Errol pp. 57, 86                          193; 4.3.19; 5.2.124, 194,
Johnson, Patrice pp. 67, 110–11                 363–4.1; pp. 409, 410, 411
Johnson, Samuel pp. 8, 135; 1.1.122;       King’s Men p. 399, 401, 403, 407,
     3.4.69–70, 99                              426–7, 429, 432
Johnson-Haddad, Miranda p. 67              Kingsley, Sir Ben pp. 11, 17, 62, 93–4
joint-ring 4.3.68                          Kingston, Jeremy pp. 60, 90
Jolson, Al p. 59                           kiss(es) 1.3.159; 5.2.358
Jones, D. A. N. p. 106                     Kittredge, George L. 2.1.109; 3.3.127
Jones, Eldred Durosimi pp. 62–3, 119,      knave p. 45; 1.1.45; 2.1.231; 4.2.140
     121                                   knee-crooking 1.1.45
Jones, Emrys 5.2.352–4; p. 399             kneels (sd.) 3.3.450.1, 462.1;
Jones, Ernest p. 78                             4.2.31–40, 151,
Jones, James Earl pp. 4, 36, 40, 49, 92,   Knight, Charles p. 45
     115                                   Knight, G. Wilson p. 24
Jones, John pp. 415–16                     Knolles, Richard pp. 17, 194; 1.3.16;
Jonson, Ben pp. 32, 72, 128, 145, 193;          5.2.344; pp. 400–1, 403
     1.3.62; 2.1.216; 3.3.93, 361–5;       knot 4.2.62

                                       479
                                     Index

know of 5.1.115                           lip 4.1.67
Knyvett, Henry 1.1.35–6                   lips 4.1.39–40
Kongo kingdom p. 26                       list 4.1.71
Kretzmer, Herbert pp. 5, 58, 85           list v. 2.3.331
Kutkevich, Sergei p. 105                  Lister, David p. 98
Kyd, Thomas 3.3.390–1; 5.2.302;           Lister, Moira p. 104
     p. 410                               Little, Arthur p. 122
                                          loading 5.2.362
labours 2.1.127–8                         locusts 1.3.342
Lacy, Thomas Hailes p. 47                 Lok, John p. 463
lack 3.3.321                              Long, William B. p. 424
Lamb, Charles pp. 45, 113                 Loomba, Ania pp. 14, 115
languishes 3.3.43                         loose of soul 3.3.418
Las Casas, Fra Bartolomé p. 124           lord 4.2.101
Laslett, Peter p. 162                     Lord Chamberlain’s Men see King’s
Laurenson, James p. 111                         Men
law-days 3.3.144                          lose 1.3.210; 3.3.323
lawn 4.3.68                               lost 5.2.268
lay 2.1.256–7; 2.3.311                    Love’s Labour’s Lost 1.3.188;
lay by 4.3.44                                   2.1.132–3, 170; 5.2.70; p. 465
lay down 4.2.13                           love’s sake 3.1.12
Le Tourneur, Pierre 4.3.24                Lowin, John p. 72
leaden 172                                lown 2.3.84
leapt 2.1.287                             Lupton, Julia Reinhard p. 116
learn 1.3.182                             Lust’s Dominion pp. 18, 465
leave 105                                 lusty 2.1.286
Leavis, F. R. pp. 57–8, 60, 74, 117,      ‘Lydford Law’ 4.1.36–7
      128
leets 3.3.144                             Macaulay, Alistair p. 99
Leo Africanus, John p. 18; 1.3.129–45,    Macbeth pp. 36; 1.1.122, 139;
      140, 340–1, 349; p. 466                 4.1.20–1, 124; 5.2.7, 362
Lepanto, battle of pp. 18, 148; 2.1.27;   McCabe, Richard pp. 88, 99
      5.2.352–4; p. 399                   Macdonald, Joyce Green pp. 42,
Lerner, Laurence p. 117                       68
lethargy 4.1.49                           McGoohan, Patrick p. 15
Levin, Bernard p. 87                      Machavariani, A. p. 15
Levin, Richard pp. 464–5                  Machiavelli, Niccolò p. 197
Lewes, G. H. pp. 10, 45, 80, 86           McKellen, Ian pp. 66, 88, 89, 95–6,
Lewkenor, Sir Lewis pp. 18, 158;              108, 109
      1.2.13–14, 43; 5.2.338              McKern, Leo pp. 57, 86
liberal 2.1.161; 3.4.36                   Macklin, Charles pp. 71, 72
liberal as the north 5.2.219              MacLiammóir, Micheál p. 88
lie 3.4.1–11                              McMillin, Scott p. 93; 2.1.0.1, 172;
lieutenant pp. 30, 151–2, 194;                2.3.135.1; 4.2.67; 4.3.60–2;
      2.3.93–7, 130; 3.3.478, pp. 461–2       5.1.62.1; pp. 405, 407, 408,
*lieutenantry 2.1.169                         421–2, 423, 424–7, 429
life 1.1.154                              McNulty, Charles p. 98
lift up eye 5.2.198                       McPherson, James A. p. 68
light 2.3.165; 4.1.98                     Macready, William Charles pp. 10, 11,
lights and torches 1.2.28                     48, 57, 74, 75, 81, 82, 102;
like 5.2.94                                   3.3.174
lingered 4.2.225                          mad 4.3.25; 5.2.113
Linschoten, Jan Huygen van 1.2.62         made mocks with 5.2.383

                                      480
                                       Index

magic 3.4.68; 5.2.168                     Measure for Measure 3.1.28; pp. 400,
magniﬁco 1.2.12                                401, 402, 403, 404
maidens’ hearts 3.4.74                    mediators 1.1.15
main 2.1.254                              medicinable 5.2.350
make after 1.1.68                         meet 1.1.144
make waay 5.1.59                          melting 5.2.348
make head against 1.3.272                 memorial corruption pp. 412, 413,
make proof of 5.1.26                           428, 431
makes 1.2.49                              Mendes, Sam pp. 66, 96, 98, 99, 100,
makes my gain 5.1.14                           109, 111, 421
malignant 5.2.352                         Merchant of Venice pp. 107, 115;
mamm’ring 3.3.71                               1.1.80; 3.1.3; 4.3.87–98; p. 450
man 1.3.330; 4.1.61                       mere 2.2.3
man but a rush 5.2.269                    Meres, Francis 5.2.143
manage 2.3.206                            Merivale, Herman Charles pp. 71, 94,
Manawa Taua pp. 9, 13, 123                     95
Mandeville, Sir John p. 463               Merry Wives of Windsor 1.3.363;
mandragora 3.3.332                             5.2.70; p. 402
mane 2.1.13                               Meryman, Richard p. 85
mangled 5.1.78                            messes 4.1.193
Mannion, Tom p. 111                       mettle 4.2.204
marble 3.3.460                            Meyerstein, E. H. W. 1.3.169
Marcell, Joseph pp. 57, 64, 69            Middleton, Thomas pp. 400, 419
Marcus, Frank p. 90                       Middleton and Rowley pp. 14, 149–50
Marcus Luccicos 1.3.45                    Midsummer Night’s Dream, A pp. 131,
mark 1.1.44; 2.3.305                           149; 2.3.197; 4.2.71–2; p. 465
Marks, Elsie pp. 9, 11, 54, 70            might not but 3.1.49
Marks, Peter p. 67                        Miles, Bernard p. 77
Marlowe, Christopher pp. 17, 32, 72,      Millard, Evelyn pp. 103–4
    169; 3.3.295; 3.4.20–1; 5.2.206,      Miller, Jonathan pp. 89, 90, 92
    284; pp. 410, 465                     Milton, John p. 165; 1.3.329–30
Marmion, Patrick pp. 61, 89               mince 2.3.238
Marowitz, Charles p. 12                   minerals 1.2.74
marry 1.2.53                              minion 5.1.34
Marston, John pp. 166; 1.1.46;            minister 2.1.263; 5.2.8
    3.3.460; 4.1.32                       minx 3.3.475
Marston, Westland p. 10                   Miola, Robert p. 193
mask 4.2.10                               mischief 1.3.203
Massing, Jean Michel p. 126               misgives 3.4.88
Mason, Brewster pp. 36, 60–1, 90          mislineation p. 425
master 1.3.78; 2.1.204                    miuse 4.2.109
Masters, Brian p. 95                      mock 3.3.169
Matar, Nabil pp. 116, 125                 molestation 2.1.16
matter 1.2.38                             Molière (Jean-Baptiste Poquelin) p. 85
Matthews, G. M. pp. 62–3, 138             Mondello, Bob pp. 67, 110
Mauretania 4.2.224                        monkeys 3.3.405; 4.1.124
Maurice (Saint) pp. 26, 27                monsters and monstrousness
Maxwell, J. C. p. 401                          pp. 138–47, 178, 1.1.88, 157;
‘maximal’ and ‘minimal’ scripts                2.3.208; 3.3.110, 111, 393;
    pp. 409, 423–4, 432                        3.4.156–7; 4.1.60
mazard 2.3.144                            Monu, Nicholas p. 64
mean 3.1.37                               mood 2.3.263–4
means 3.3.253                             moon 4.2.77

                                       481
                                      Index

Moor(s) pp. 115–16, 157; 1.1.6–39, 57,      Neville, John pp. 79, 89
    111; 1.3.340–1; 2.1.221;                New Bibliography pp. 406, 408, 419,
    3.4.28–9; 4.1.60; 4.2.224;                   423
    5.2.224, 352–4, 365; p. 466             *new-create 4.1.268
Moorship 1.1.32                             Newman, Karen pp. 115, 122, 126,
*moraller 2.3.287                                139
more 3.3.402                                next 1.3.204
Moriarty, Marcus J. p. 50                   nice 3.3.15
Morgan, Emily p. 106                        Nicosia, siege of p. 400
Morley, Sheridan p. 61                      Nightingale, Benedict p. 99
Morris, Clara p. 49                         nightcap 2.1.298
mortal 3.4.111                              nightgown 1.1.158.1
mortal engines 3.3.357                      nightly wearing 4.3.14
mortise 2.1.9                               Niven, Penelope p. 40
Moseley, Humphrey pp. 426–7                 Nkrumah, Kwame p. 58
moth 1.3.254                                Noble, George pp. 39 (ﬁg. 5), 135–6
motion 1.2.75; 1.3.96, 326; 2.3.165         Noble, Louise p. 467
mountebanks 1.3.62                          noise 3.1.13
move 2.3.368                                none such 3.1.18
moved 3.4.18                                nose 3.1.3; 4.1.39–40, 117
Mowat, Barbara pp. 419, 431, 464            not this hour 2.3.13
Much Ado About Nothing p. 131;              not your way 4.1.180
    1.3.255; 4.1.70                         nothing 3.3.433
much to do but 4.3.29–30                    notorious 5.2.238
Muir, Kenneth pp. 18, 22; 3.3.453–6;        Nunn, Trevor pp. 11, 64, 65, 95, 99,
    3.4.71                                       106, 108, 109, 111
mummy 3.4.73; pp. 466–7
mutiny 2.3.147                              O 5.2.289
mutualities 2.1.253                         O me 5.1.57
                                            oaths and profanities pp. 405, 411,
naked 5.2.257                                    415, 418, 428, 432
napkin 3.3.293                              obedient 3.3.90; 4.1.147–8
Naples 3.1.2                                obey 5.2.194
Nathan, Norman p. 137                       object 363–4.1
National Theatre (Royal) pp. 66, 96,        objective genitive 3.3.220; 4.1.90
     98, 99, 100, 109, 111; 1.2.22;         obsequious 1.1.46
     p. 421                                 observance 3.3.155
nature pp. 142–5, 221                       observancy 3.4.145
necessaries 2.1.275                         occasion 2.1.236; 3.1.49; 4.1.49
Neely, Carol Thomas pp. 39, 125             occupation 3.3.359
neigh 1.1.112                               ocular proof (see eyes) 1.1.27;
Neill, Michael pp. 32, 37, 41, 45, 115,          3.3.361–5, 433; 4.2.1–4, 25–6
     126, 127, 131, 136, 138, 139, 140,     odd-even 1.1.122
     145; 1.1.2, 41–65, 89; 2.1.200;        odds 2.3.176
     2.3.306–7; 3.3.119; 3.4.34–6,          Odyssey 3.280–1
     155–6; 4.1.77; 5.2.363–4.1;            off-capped 1.1.9
     p. 462                                 offend(s) 2.3.190; 5.2.61
Neill, Juliet p. 69                         ofﬁce (see also place, service) 1.1.16;
Neilson-Terry p. 48                              1.3.377; 3.3.377, 414; 3.4.109;
Nelson, Tim Blake p. 6                           4.2.92–3
Nelson, T. G. A. pp. 137–8, 155             ofﬁces 2.2.8
nephews 1.1.112                             ofﬁced 1.3.268
nettles 1.3.317–18                          ofﬁcer 1.1.16

                                          482
                                        Index

ofﬁcers of night 1.1.181                   parlours 2.1.110
Ogude, S. E. p. 70                         parrot 2.3.269
Okes, Nicholas pp. 407, 429                particular 1.3.56
Okri, Ben pp. 113, 146                     part 1.3.75
Oliver, Edith p. 49                        Partridge, Eric 2.1.153
Olivier, Laurence (Lord) pp. 5, 10,        parts 1.2.31; 1.3.251; 2.3.305
     57–60, 62, 78, 85–8, 89, 94, 95,      ‘parts’ (actors’) pp. 425–6, 431
     117, 1.3.159; 3.3.362.1, 460;         Pasolini, Pier Paolo p. 10
     5.2.15, 250.1                         pass 2.3.237
Olympus 2.1.183                            passage 5.1.38
O’Neill, Eliza p. 102                      passing 1.3.160
on the hip 2.1.296                         passion 4.1.38, 249
on you neck 5.2.168                        Paster, Gail 2.1.192; 2.3.197;
once 3.3.182–3                                   3.4.139
opinion 2.3.186                            patent 4.1.191
opposite 1.2.67                            patience 4.1.86
opposition 2.3.175                         Paton, Maureen pp. 95, 106, 108
oppresses 1.1.142                          ‘Pavier quartos’ p. 407
Oras, Ants p. 402                          Payne, Henry Nevil p. 14
Orkin, Martin pp. 63, 120–1, 123           peace 5.2.159
Orgel, Stephen p. 5                        pearl 5.2.346–7
Orr, Bridget p. 124                        Pechter, Edward pp. 1, 9, 36, 60, 71;
Otello p. 193                                    3.3.204; 4.2.64
Othman p. 194                              Peck, Linda Levy p. 161
Ottoman Empire p. 194                      Peck, Bob pp. 61, 91
Ottomites 1.3.34                           peculiar 1.1.60; 4.1.65
out 4.1.109; 5.2.120                       Peele, George p. 18
out of fashion 2.1.201                     peevish 2.3.176
out o’th’way 3.4.79                        Pepys, Samuel pp. 9, 101
out-sport 2.3.3                            peradventure 2.1.283
out-tongue 1.2.19                          Percy, Thomas 2.3.81–8; p. 447
overt 1.3.108                              perdition 2.2.3
Overton, Richard p. 167                    perdurable 1.3.332
Ovid 5.2.343                               period 5.2.356
owe 1.1.66; 3.3.335                        perplexed 5.2.345
Oxenbridge, Faith p. 69                    pestilence 2.3.341
Oxford editors p. 431                      Peter, John pp. 11, 95, 98, 99, 109
                                           Peters, Clarke p. 64
Packard, Vance p. 150                      Petrarch, Francesco 1.3.159
paddle 2.1.246                             perdition 3.4.66
pagans 1.2.99                              perfect 1.2.31
pageant 1.3.19                             permission 1.3.329–30
pains 1.1.182; 1.3.159                     person 1.3.386
painted 4.1.249                            Phillips, Caryl pp. 12–13
Palmer, John 5.2.357–8                     pictures 2.1.109
Papp, Joe p. 49                            piece of work 4.1.146
Paracelsus pp. 466, 467                    pierced p. 1.3.218
Paradise Lost see Milton                   pioneers 3.3.348
paragons v. 2.1.62                         pipe 3.1.13
parcels 1.3.154                            pirated texts p. 423
Parker, Oliver pp. 68, 88, 137–8           pitch 2.3.345
Parker, Patricia p. 139; 3.3.127;          pith 1.3.84
     4.3.37                                pitiful 5.2.208

                                        483
                                       Index

place (see also ofﬁce, service) pp. 32,      precious 5.2.233
     135–58, 178; 1.1.10, 103, 144,          prefer 2.1.269
     155; 1.3.54, 221, 236; 2.3.93–7,        preferment 1.1.35–6
     306–7; 3.3.250–1, 415, 478;             pregnant 2.1.229–30
     4.1.253; 4.2.229; 5.2.195               preparation 1.3.14
plain 2.1.303                                preposterously 1.3.63
platform 2.3.111                             prerogatived 3.3.277
play 2.1.114                                 prescription 1.3.305
play the sir 2.1.171                         present 1.2.90, 1.3.125
played 4.3.80                                presently 3.1.36; 5.2.54
players 2.1.112                              pressed 3.4.172
pleasance 2.3.280                            Pressley, Nelson pp. 110–11
please it 1.3.189                            Prester John p. 26
pliant 1.3.151                               Preston, Mary p. 114
plies 2.3.339                                price 1.1.10; 4.3.64
Pliny the Elder pp. 19–20, 145;              pricked 3.3.414
     2.1.153; 3.3.331, 453–6;                pride 3.3.356, 406
     5.2.101–3, 143, 349–50; pp. 399,        prime 3.3.405–6
     463                                     Privedi, Poonam p. 13
plume up 1.3.382                             probal 2.3.323
Plummer, Christopher pp. 4, 36, 92–3         probation 3.3.367
Plutarch p. 168                              process 1.3.142
point on me 5.2.47                           proclaim 1.1.69
poise 1.3.322; 3.3.83                        procreants 4.2.28
poison 2.3.341                               produced 1.1.145
poisons v. 5.2.363                           profane 1.1.114; 2.1.161
Poitier, Sidney p. 40                        profane v. 1.3.373
policy 2.3.264                               proﬁt 3.3.80–1, 381
Pollard, A. W. pp. 407, 408                  Promethean 5.2.11
Polydore Virgil p. 450                       prompt books pp. 412, 417, 424
Pontic Sea 3.3.453–6, 453                    proofs 3.3.431, 442
Pope, Alexander 1.3.159                      proper 1.3.70; 1.3.381; 4.3.33
poppy 3.3.332                                property 1.1.171
portance 1.3.139                             Propontic (Sea) 3.3.456
Porter, Thomas p. 14                         propose 1.1.24
Pory, John pp. 18; 1.3.129–45                propriety 2.2.167
position 2.1.230                             prospect 3.3.400
possession 5.2.277                           prosperity 2.1.271
possible 2.3.276; 4.1.40; 4.2.87             prosperous 1.3.243
Potter, Lois pp. 9, 17, 36, 49, 57, 62,      protest 4.2.202–3
     68, 71, 74, 75, 78, 81, 83, 88, 89,     proud 1.2.23
     94, 96, 99, 101, 102, 103, 104,         prove 3.3.193; 5.1.66
     106, 108, 110                           provender 1.1.48
potting 2.3.70                               proverbial usages 1.1.25, 42, 64;
pottle 2.3.50                                     1.3.139, 172, 201, 298, 362–3,
practice 1.3.103; 3.4.137; 5.2.290                390, 392–3; 2.1.109–13, 114,
practised 1.2.73                                  129–47, 180, 216; 2.3.59, 66,
practiser 1.2.78–9                                69–76, 94, 161–3, 232, 234, 238,
practising 2.1.301                                254–5, 261–2, 265–6, 269, 292,
praise 5.1.66                                     309–12, 336–8, 351–2, 355, 356,
pranks 1.3.141                                    362, 364; 3.1.8, 49; 3.3.130,
prating 2.1.219                                   159–60, 161, 166, 175, 176–7,
pray 3.3.221                                      178–9, 213, 278–9, 301, 303, 384,

                                           484
                                       Index

     405, 406, 478; 3.4.5.6, 34–6, 65;       reckoning 3.4.171
     4.1.32, 35–6, 36–7, 58, 88, 93,         recognizance 5.2.212
     141, 143, 176, 237; 4.2.25–6, 39,       recoiling 3.3.240
     144, 172; 4.3.43, 54; 5.1.3, 4, 66,     recover 2.3.263
     103, 124; 5.2.4, 5, 7, 96, 131–2,       refer 1.2.64
     134, 135, 154, 187, 219, 246–7,         Reisch, Walter p. 9
     250, 260, 264, 272, 274–5, 284,         relish 2.1.163–4
     301, 316                                relume 5.2.13
provocation 2.3.21–2                         remembrance 3.3.294; 3.4.181
provulgate 1.2.21                            remorse 3.3.468
psychomachia 3.3.447–9                       repeals 2.3.342
public 4.2.73                                reprobance 5.2.207
puddled 3.4.139                              re-stem 1.3.38–9
puffed 3.4.133                               resolved 3.3.182–3
puny 5.2.243                                 respect 4.2.190
Purchase, Bruce 4.2.57–62                    Revels ofﬁce pp. 423, 432
put 5.1.2                                    Revenger’s Tragedy 3.1.179
put away your pipes 3.1.19                   reverend p. 203
put it to 3.3.394                            revision, theories of pp. 409, 410–11,
put me to’t 2.1.118                               416, 422, 429, 431
put on 2.3.336                               rheum 3.4.49
put out the light 5.2.7                      Rhodes 1.1.28; p. 400
put up 4.2.180                               Richard II 5.2.362
putting on 2.1.295                           Richard III pp. 32, 72; 1.1.65; 1.2.28;
                                                  1.3.255; 2.3.321; 3.3.274; 4.3.19;
qualiﬁcation 2.1.266–7                            5.1.115; 5.2.44
qualiﬁed 2.3.36                              Richards, David p. 94
qualities 3.3.362                            Richardson, Sir Ralph p. 78
quality 1.3.249; 3.3.355                     Richardson, Tony p. 104
Quarshie, Hugh pp. 5, 69–70, 106             Ridley, M. R. pp. 34, 37, 118–19;
quarter 2.3.171                                   1.2.72–7; 1.3.166, 342; 2.1.14,
quat 5.1.11                                       165; 2.3.345; 3.3.120; 3.3.388;
Quayle, Sir Anthony pp. 57, 58, 83, 89            4.1.231; 5.2.265–71; pp. 412, 413,
quick 2.1.80                                      415
quicken 3.3.280; 4.2.67                      rise 2.1.115; 2.3.152
quillets 3.1.23                              rites 1.3.255
Quin, James pp. 47, 79                       Rizvi, Parvez 1.1.14; 2.3.153–6; p. 417
quirks 2.1.63                                Robeson, Paul pp. 9, 11, 36, 53–7, 61,
quite 5.128                                       94, 114, 141
                                             Robinson, Henry Crabb p. 80
race, see colour                             Robson, William p. 80
raised 1.2.29, 43                            Roderigo 1.1.56
Ralegh, Walter (Sir) pp. 20, 463             Roman 4.1.115
ram 1.1.88                                   Romeo and Juliet pp. 112, 131, 1.3.166,
rank a. 2.1.297; 3.3.236                          255; 4.2.71–2; 5.2.70, 306–28;
rank n. see place                                 pp. 421, 423
rash 3.4.78                                  rose 5.2.13–15
Rasmussen, Eric pp. 410, 422                 *rose-lipped 4.2.63
Ratcliffe, Michael pp. 93, 94, 421           Rose, Lloyd p. 67
raven 4.1.20–1                               Rosenberg, Marvin pp. 10, 14, 47, 48,
reach 3.3.222                                     73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 83, 102
reason 3.3.65                                Ross, Lawrence J. pp. 155, 467
rebuke 2.3.200                               Rossi, Ernesto pp. 48, 49, 81–2

                                           485
                                       Index

Rossini, Gioachino p. 15                     seamy 4.2.146
round 1.3.91                                 seat 2.1.287
rouse 2.3.60                                 seated (sd.) 1.3.0.1
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques p. 451                second 2.3.130
rout 2.3.201                                 sect 1.3.327
Rowe, Nicholas pp. 37–8, 45, 47;             secure 4.1.67
    1.3.247; 3.3.362.1                       seel 1.3.267; 3.3.213
royal 3.3.355                                *segregation 2.1.10
rude 1.3.82; 3.3.357                         self-bounty 3.3.203
rufﬁaned 2.1.7                               self-charity 2.3.193
Rushdie, Salman pp. 13, 123                  sennight 2.1.77
Rymer, Thomas pp. 3–6, 8, 15, 24–5,          sense 1.2.64, 72; 1.3.258; 3.3.240;
    34, 35, 36, 37, 41, 45, 74, 91, 113,           4.3.89; 4.3.288
    124, 136, 146, 179                       sentence pp. 227, 228
                                             Sepulveda, Fra Juan Ginés de p. 124
sadly 2.1.33                                 sequester 3.4.38
Saggitary 1.1.157                            sequestration 1.3.339
Salih, Tayeb pp. 13, 117–18, 123             sequent 1.2.41
salt 2.1.234; 3.3.405–6; 3.4.49              seriously 1.3.146
Salvini, Tommaso pp. 10, 48, 49, 81–2,       serpent’s curse 4.2.16
      83, 95; 4.1.44–177                     serve 1.1.42
sanctimony 1.3.348                           service (see also ofﬁce, place)
Sanders, Norman pp. 34, 58, 93, 117;               pp. 149–50, 158–69, 178; 1.1.34,
      1.3.247; 2.1.0.1, 11, 27;                    47, 57; 1.2.4; 3.1.55; 3.2.2;
      2.3.69–76, 158; 4.1.262–4;                   3.3.18, 467, 479; 5.2.194, 338
      4.2.57–62; pp. 399, 416                servants 2.3.138; 3.2.6; 3.3.9
Sandford, Samuel pp. 72, 74                  session 1.2.86
sans 1.3.65                                  set 1.3.318
Sant’Iago Matamoros p. 194                   set down the pegs 2.1.195
satisfaction 4.2.200                         set the watch 2.3.111
satisﬁed him 5.2.317                         several 1.2.46
satisfy 3.3.385–92, 392                      Seymour, Alan pp. 59, 88
satisfying 5.1.9                             shadowing 4.1.38
satisﬁed 4.2.244                             Shakespeare, John 5.2.272
saucy 1.1.127                                shambles 4.2.66
Saunders, Ben 2.1.174                        shape him for 2.1.56
’Sblood 1.1.4                                Shaw, Bernard pp. 5–6, 7, 11, 83,
scant 4.3.86                                       179
scapes 1.3.136                               Sherley, Sir Antony 5.2.355
scattering 3.3.155                           shifted 4.1.74
Schlegel, A. W. p. 117                       Shirley, James 5.1.25
Schrōder, F. L. p. 14                       shirt 5.1.48
scion 1.3.327                                Shorter, Eric p. 91
Scoﬁeld, Paul pp. 60, 61, 91–2, 112          shot of courtesy 2.1.57
score 3.4.174                                should be 3.3.384
scored 4.1.123                               shouldst me 3.3.383
scorn of fortunes 1.3.247                    shrewd 3.3.430
scorn of time 4.2.54                         shrift 3.3.24
scurvy 1.2.7                                 Shulman, Milton pp. 79, 84, 105, 106
sea-mark 5.2.267                             sibyl 3.4.69
seals 2.3.329                                Siddons, Sarah p. 102
Sears, Djanet p. 13                          siege 1.2.22
sea-bank 4.1.129                             Siemon, James R. pp. 8, 135

                                           486
                                    Index

sighs 1.3.159                             splinter 2.3.310
sign 1.1.155, 156                         Spivack, Bernard pp. 31, 72
Signory 1.2.18                            spirit 1.1.103
silliness 1.3.304                         *spirit-stirring 3.3.354
silly 1.3.303                             spleen 4.1.84
simple 1.1.107                            sport 2.1.222; 4.3.92
simpleness 1.3.245                        spotted 3.3.436; 5.1.37
Simpson, O. J. pp. 67, 68, 123            Sprague, A. C. pp. 9, 10
Sinden, Donald pp. 60, 61, 90–1           speed 4.1.104
sink 2.3.200                              spoiled 5.1.55
Singh, Jyotsna p. 14                      *squabble 2.3.269
sir 2.3.157; 3.4.85                       squadron 1.1.21
sirrah 3.4.1                              squire 4.2.145
sith 3.3.382                              Stack, William p. 53
skillet 1.3.270                           stamp 2.1.236
slave 5.2.275                             Stanislavski, Konstantin p. 90
slavery 1.2.99                            stands in act 1.1.150
slime 5.2.146                             start 1.1.102
slip 4.1.9                                startingly 3.4.78
slipper 2.1.235                           state 1.3.234; 3.4.136
slubber 1.3.225                           Stationers’ Company p. 407
small beer 2.1.158                        stay you 5.1.104
smell thee 5.2.15                         stead 1.3.333
Smith, Maggie pp. 36, 59, 104, 105        Steele, Richard p. 79
Smith, Peter p. 5                         steep-down 5.2.279
Smythe, John p. 69                        Steevens, George 1.1.4–7; 3.3.127;
snipe 1.3.374                                   4.1.68–9
snorting 1.1.90                           Stendhal (Henri Beyle) p. 8
Snow, Edward A. p. 155                    Stephenson, Sarah p. 105
Snyder, Susan pp. 5, 28                   Stewart, Ian pp. 61, 91
so 3.3.349; 5.1.22                        Stewart, Patrick pp. 64–5, 66–7, 94,
Sodkhanskaya, N. S. p. 52                       110–11; 3.3.93; 4.2.41; 5.2.15,
soft 1.3.83; 3.3.267                            357–8
soft you 5.2.227                          Stewart-Dorn, Franchelle p. 110
sold 5.2.144                              stick 4.2.108–9
solicit 5.2.32                            still 1.3.129; 2.1.105
solicitor 3.3.27                          stillness 2.3.182
Sonnets (Shakespeare) 1.1.65; 5.2.206     stirring 3.1.28
sorry 3.4.49; p. 428                      stomach(s) 3.4.100; 5.2.77
soul 1.2.31                               stone 5.2.65
soundly 3.3.173                           stones 5.2.233
Southam, Brian p. 14                      stop 2.3.2, 293; 5.2.263
Southerne, Thomas p. 41                   stops 3.3.124; 4.2.77
Spanish Tragedy see Kyd, Thomas           stops me 2.1.192
Spartan dog 5.2.360                       store 4.3.80
Speaight, Robert p. 77                    stoup 2.3.27
speak your bosom 3.1.55                   straight 1.3.49; 3.3.88
speculative 1.3.268                       strain 3.3.221; 3.3.254
Spencer, Charles pp. 97, 98, 99, 100      strange 5.2.187
spends 1.3.208                            stranger 1.1.135
Spenser, Edmund 2.3.280–1; 3.3.93,        strangeness 3.3.12–13
      390–1                               Stratford-upon-Avon 1.1.76; 5.2.272
spirits 3.4.61                            Stratioticos see Digges, Leonard

                                        487
                                    Index

strawberries 3.3.436                      Taylor, James H. p. 118
Strier, Richard p. 176                    Taylor, Joseph p. 72
strike 3.4.174                            Taylor, Paul pp. 97, 99
Stuart, Lady Frances p. 174               Tearle, Godfrey pp. 83–4, 94, 111
stubborn 1.3.226                          teem with 4.1.236
Stubbes, Philip 3.3.144                   tell’s another tale 5.1.124
Stubbs, Imogen p. 106                     tells 3.3.172
stuff 1.2.2                               Tempest, The pp. 33, 125, 171; 1.2.28;
*stuffed 1.1.13                                 2.3.135.1; pp. 401, 447, 463
subdued 1.3.248                           temptation scene pp. 132–3
substitute p. 228                         tenderly 1.3.390
subtle 1.3.349; 2.1.235                   tenderness 2.1.226
subirned 1.3.149                          *tented 1.3.86
success 3.3.226                           term 1.1.38
such another 4.1.141                      Terreblanche, Eugene p. 64
Suchet, David pp. 88, 91, 93–4            Terry, Ellen pp. 75, 102, 104
sudden 2.1.263; 4.2.190                   test 1.3.108
sufferance 2.1.23                         Thacker, David p. 65
sufﬁciency 1.3.223                        that 1.3.269; 4.2.154
sufﬁcient 3.4.89; 4.1.257                 thee see thou
*suffocating 3.3.391                      Theobald, Lewis p. 124; 2.3.271, 305;
suggest 2.3.337                                 5.1.26.1; 5.2.101–3
sullen p. 428                             theoric 1.1.23
Sullivan, Arthur p. 451                   thick-lips 1.1.66
sulphur 3.3.331; 5.2.278–9                thicken 3.3.431
*supervisor 3.3.397                       thief 1.2.57
supplied 4.1.27                           thinly 3.3.432
support 1.3.256                           Thomas, Ben p. 64
surety 1.3.379                            Thomas, Sîan p. 105
Suzman, Janet pp. 63–4, 110, 123          Thomas, William 1.2.13–14
swag-bellied 2.3.71                       Thompson, Leslie p. 467
sweating 3.4.40                           Thorello p. 193
swelling 2.3.51                           thou (and you) pp. 193; 1.1.117;
sword of Spain 5.2.252                          1.3.297; 2.1.208–9, 255–7; 3.3.9;
’swounds 1.1.86                                 5.1.120; 5.2.133; 5.2.289–91
sycamore 4.3.37                           thrice-driven 1.3.230
sympathy 2.1.113                          throwing 1.1.52
                                          Tiberius p. 465
tail 3.1.8                                Tierney, Colin p. 111
tainting 2.1.259                          Tilney, Sir Edmund p. 399
ta’en order for’t 5.2.74                  time scheme pp. 33–6; 3.3.312;
take exception 4.2.206–7                        3.4.99, 168–9; 4.2.44–5; 5.2.210
tall 2.1.79                               Timon of Athens 3.3.460
Talma, Joseph pp. 10, 42                  timorous 1.1.75
Taming of the Shrew 3.3.23; 4.3.69        tinder 1.1.139
taper 1.1.140                             Tinker, Jack pp. 95, 96
tarras 1.1.81–1                           tire 2.1.65
task v. 2.3.38                            title 1.2.31
tasks 4.2.112                             Titus Andromicus pp. 18, 45, 115, 126;
Tasso, Torquato p. 17                           3.3.447; 5.2.302; pp. 465, 467
taste 2.1.266–7                           to 1.2.56
Taylor, Gary pp. 181, 414–15, 418–19,     to do 3.3.74
     462                                  to the sense 5.1.11

                                        488
                                    Index

to th’vantage 4.3.79                     ‘ud’s 4.3.70
toad 3.3.273; 4.2.61                     ‘ud’s death 5.2.71
toga’d 1.1.24                            unbitted 1.3.326
token 5.2.63                             unblest 5.1.35
told 2.2.10                              unbonneted 1.2.23
tongue 2.1.101                           *unbookish 4.1.97
Took, Barry p. 91                        uncapable 4.2.229
touch 2.3.211; 3.3.82; 4.1.191           undertake 2.3.316
touching 2.1.33                          undertaker 4.1.203
town of war 2.3.204                      unfolding 1.3.243
toy 1.4.152                              unfold(s) 3.3.247; 4.2.141; 5.1.21
Toynbee, Arnold p. 59                    unforced 2.1.230
trace 2.1.294–5                          unhandsome 3.4.147
Tracy, Susan p. 107                      unhappy 2.3.30–1; 3.4.98; 4.1.224
*tranquil 3.3.350                        unhatched 3.4.137
trash 2.1.294; 3.3.161                   unhoused 1.2.26
travailous 1.3.139                       unkind 4.1.219
Travels of Sir John Mandeville p. 20     unkindness 3.4.148; 4.2.159
traverse 1.3.363                         unlace 2.3.185
travesties (of Othello) pp. 42–4         unlucky 5.2.340
Tree, Sir Herbert Beerbohm pp. 47–8,     unpin 4.3.19
     49, 81                              unprovide
trespass 3.3.65; 4.2.152                 unquietness 3.4.129
Trewin, J. C. pp. 84, 85, 104            *unshunnable
tribe 3.3.178                            unvarnished 1.3.91
trick 4.2.129                            unwholesome 4.1.117
tricks of custom 3.3.126                 *unwitted 2.3.173
Troilus and Cressida pp. 154; 1.3.247;   upon 2.2.2; 5.2.325
     2.1.175; 3.3.23, 273; 4.1.141;      Ure, Mary p. 104
     5.2.219; pp. 402, 403, 404          use 2.1.130; 4.1.266; 4.3.97
truly 4.2.38                             uses 4.3.99
trumpets pp. 445–6                       used 5.2.71
truncheon 2.1.264                        utmost 4.2.51
tup 5.2.136                              utmost sail 5.2.267
tupping 1.1.89
tupped 3.3.398                           *vale of years 3.3.269
turbaned 5.2.352–4                       Valk, Frederick pp. 77, 82
Turk(s) pp. 115–16, 147, 194; 2.1.114;   Van Volkenburg, Nellie p. 55
     2.3.161–3; 5.2.352–4                Vandenhoff, George p. 75
turn 4.1.244; 4.2.62                     vanity 4.2.164
turn Turk 2.3.161–3                      Varma, Indira p. 109
turned your wit 4.2.146                  vast 1.3.140
tush 1.1.1                               Vaughan, Virginia Mason pp. 10, 14,
Tutin, Dorothy p. 104                         36, 75, 83, 106, 108, 122–3
Twelfth Night pp. 112; 1.3.166;          Vaughan Williams, Ralph p. 451
     2.1.170; 4.1.32; 4.3.26–7;          Venice pp. 148–9, 211; 1.3.62;
     pp. 402, 403                             2.3.265–6
twiggen bottle 2.3.139                   Venus and Adonis 3.3.93; 3.4.34–6
’twill out 5.2.218                       venture 4.3.72
Two Noble Kinsmen 5.2.4                  Verdi, Giuseppe pp. 6, 7, 15, 65, 95,
Tynan, Kenneth pp. 58, 59, 77, 79,            99; 5.2.357–8
     85, 86, 87, 104, 105; 3.3.362.1,    Veronese 2.1.27
     460                                 very 1.2.2

                                     489
                                        Index

very much 4.1.234                          Webster, John pp. 72, 150; 5.2.71;
very nature 2.1.227                             p. 421
vessel 4.2.83                              Webster, Margaret p. 56
vesture 2.1.64                             wedding sheets 4.2.105
Viganò, Salvatore p. 15                    well 1.3.379
villain 1.1.117                            well met 2.1.207
villainous 1.3.307                         well said 2.1.165; 4.1.111
violence 1.3.247; 2.1.217                  Welles, Orson pp. 57, 58, 88, 104
Virgil 3.4.69–70; 4.2.79                   Wells, Stanley pp. 181, 400, 415
virtue 1.3.287, 315; 3.3.352;              Werstine, Paul pp. 412, 419, 420, 424,
      4.1.258                                   430, 431, 464
visage 1.1.50; 1.3.250                     what you will 4.1.32
Vitkus, Daniel pp. 21, 115, 116, 122,      Wheatcroft, Geoffrey p. 65
      124, 157; 5.2.289                    wheeling 1.1.135
Vogel, Paula pp. 4, 41                     whereon 3.3.85
voice 1.3.258                              Whitehall, Palace of p. 399
Volpone see Jonson                         Whitney, Geoffrey p. 155
Voltaire, François-Marie Arouet de         Whitworth, Philip p. 89
      p. 14                                white 2.1.132–3
voluble 2.1.232                            White, Willard pp. 57, 64, 95, 96, 106
voluntary 4.1.26                           Whitelaw, Billie p. 105
votarist 4.2.188                           Whitney, Lois p. 18
vouch 1.3.259                              whore 5.2.228
                                           Whythorne, Thomas p. 167
wait upon 3.2.6                            wider 1.3.108
Waith, Eugene M. p. 74                     Wickham, Rupert p. 89
Wallack J. W. 4.1.0                        Wiest, Dianne p. 36
Walker, Alice pp. 114, 408, 411–14,        wight 2.1.156
     420                                   wild 2.3.205
Walker, Rudolph pp. 57, 64                 wild fame 2.1.62
Walkington, Thomas 3.4.139                 will 1.3.256, 329–30, 341; 3.3.236
Walkley, Thomas pp. 158, 406,              Williams, Gordon p. 154
     407–8, 413, 421, 423, 427, 429,       willow 4.3.26–7
     431                                   Willow Song pp. 101, 175; 4.3.24–9;
Walton, J. K. pp. 414, 420                      5.2.245–7; pp. 411, 417, 418, 421,
Wambu, Onyekachi p. 70                          445, 450–3
Wanamaker, Sam p. 78                       Wilson, John p. 34
Wanamaker, Zoë pp. 108–9                   Wilson, John Dover p. 114
wanting 3.3.344                            Wilson, Richard pp. 65–6
wanton 1.3.267                             wind instrument 3.1.10
Warburton, William 3.4.44–5                window (sd.) 1.1.81.1
Warren, Michael p. 414                     *wind-shaked 2.1.13
Wardle, Irving pp. 60, 62, 63              Wine, Martin L. p. 36
warrant 2.1.274; 3.3.20                    winks 4.2.77
warranty 5.2.62                            Winter, William pp. 50, 76, 113–14
watch him tame 3.3.23                      Winter’s Tale 3.3.220, 392
watches 2.1.212                            wisdome 3.1.46
watching 3.3.288                           wit 2.1.129, 132; 2.3.353; 3.3.466
waterish 3.3.15                            witchcraft 3.3.214; 3.4.68–74
wayward 3.3.295                            with your earliest 2.3.7
wear 3.3.201                               within door 4.2.144
*wear my heart upon my sleeve 1.1.64       witty 2.1.131
web 3.4.68                                 wived 3.4.63

                                        490
                                Index

womaned 3.4.190                    yawn 5.2.103
women pp. 169–77                   yerked 1.2.5
wonder 3.4.97                      yet 3.3.433–4; 4.2.156
wont 2.3.181                       you see thou
work 2.1.115; 3.3.299              you have said 4.2.201
works 3.2.3; 5.2.211               you talk 4.3.23
worse and worse 2.1.134            Young, Al p. 13
Worsley, T. C. p. 104              Young, B. A. pp. 58, 90, 105
would 3.4.110                      Young, Charles p. 75
wretch 3.3.91                      Young, Edward p. 15
Wright, Abraham pp. 2, 36
wrought 5.2.344                    Zadek, Peter p. 10
wrought to his desire 5.2.322      Zefﬁrelli, Franco p. 84
wrought upon p. 107                Zvantsev, K. p. 52




                                491
