The Translator of Desires
The Lockert Library of Poetry in Translation
Series Editors
Peter Cole, Richard Sieburth, and Rosanna Warren

Series Editor Emeritus (1991‒2016)
Richard Howard

For other titles in the Lockert Library, see the list at the end of this volume.
The Translator of Desires

Poe ms by

Muhyiddin Ibn ‘A r abi


T r a nsl at ed by

Michael Sells




Pr i nceton U n i v er sit y Pr e ss
Pr i nceton a n d Ox for d
Copyright © 2021 by Princeton University Press
Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work
should be sent to permissions@press.princeton.edu
Published by Princeton University Press
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TR
press.princeton.edu
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ibn al-ʻArabī, 1165–1240, author. | Sells, Michael Anthony, editor.
Title: The translator of desires / Muhyiddin Ibn ‘Arabi ; translated by
Michael Sells.
Other titles: Turjumān al-ashwāq. English
Description: Princeton : Princeton University Press, [2021] | Series: The
Lockert library of poetry in translation | Originally published in
Arabic as Turjumān al-ashwāq.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020036857 (print) | LCCN 2020036858 (ebook) | ISBN
9780691181349 (trade paperback ; acid-free paper) | ISBN 9780691181332
(hardback ; acid-free paper) | ISBN 9780691212548 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Sufi poetry, Arabic—Translations into English. | Love
poetry, Arabic—Translations into English. | LCGFT: Poetry.
Classification: LCC PJ7755.I175 T813 2021 (print) | LCC PJ7755.I175
(ebook) | DDC 892.7/134—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020036857
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020036858
British Library Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data is available
Editorial: Anne Savarese and Jenny Tan
Production Editorial: Ellen Foos
Text Design: Pamela Schnitter
Jacket/Cover Design: Pamela Schnitter
Production: Erin Suydam
Publicity: Alyssa Sanford and Amy Stewart
Copyeditor: Daniel Simon
Cover art: (front) Fragments of a carpet with lattice and blossom pattern, ca. 1650.
Made in India or present-day Pakistan, Kashmir, or Lahore. Bequest of Benjamin Altman,
1913 / The Metropolitan Museum of Art. (spine) “A Prince Sitting on a Terrace.” Illustration
from Ardashir Album, Mughal, 17th century / Museum of Islamic Art, Doha
The Lockert Library of Poetry in Translation is supported by a bequest from Charles Lacy
Lockert (1999–­1974)
This book has been composed in Adobe Text Pro and Minon Pro
Printed on acid-­free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
To Janet, Ariela, and Maya
Contents


Translator’s Introduction xii
Acknowledgments xxxv
Note on Arabic Names xxxvii

The Translator of Desires
 1. Bewildered 3
 2. Release 5
 3. The Offering 11
 4. As Night Let Down Its Curtain 15
 5. Harmony Gone 19
 6. Artemisia and Moringa 23
 7. Gowns of Dark 25
 8. Who Forever 29
 9. Soft-­Eyed Graces 33
10. Mirror 35
11. Gentle Now, Doves 37
12. Sunblaze 43
13. Grief Between 47
14. Hadith of Love 53
15. Just a Flash 57
16. Star Shepherd 61
17. God Curse My Love 67
18. As Cool as Life 71



                                       vii
19. The Tombs of Those Who Loved Them               75
20. In a Bad Way            79
21. Your Wish 89
22. Blacksilver        93
23. Blaze       97
24. Stay Now          103
25. Vanished         109
26. Vintage of Adam               113
27. Old Shrine         117
28. No New Moon Risen                   121
29. Circling         127
30. Like Sába’s Lost Tribes              135
31. Áda Trail         149
32. Fifty Years        155
33. Drowning Eyes             157
34. Sweet the Gaze            159
35. You Now          161
36. Lightning over Gháda                163
37. Come Down to the Waters                   165
38. A Persian Girl          169
39. Day Falls Night           171
40. Odd to Even 175
41. My Only Guide             179
42. Sign Masters            185
43. Parting’s Hour           189
44. Chimera          193
45. Where Gone              197
46. Cool Lightning            199
47. The Turning            203


viii Contents
48. Brave 205
49. In the Ruins of My Body         209
50. Done    211
51. Nightwalker       213
52. Rídwa     215
53. Like a Doubled Letter         219
54. Dár al-­Fálak 221
55. No Cure    225
56. Baghdad Song       227
57. Red Rise    231
58. Is There a Way     233
59. I Came to Know          237
60. Artemisia and Arâr        241
61. Tigris Song     243

Notes to the Poems 245
Appendix 1: Niẓām Preface 281
Appendix 2: Qurrat al-­ʿ Ayn Preface 284
Appendix 3: Apologia 286
Appendix 4: Ibn ʿArabī’s Poem on al-­Z ahrā’ 287
Appendix 5: Chronology of Ibn ʿArabī’s Life
  and Times 288
Appendix 6: Establishing the Text: Manuscripts, Editions,
  and Method 290
Appendix 7: Annotated Chronology of Tarjumān
  Translations 299
Glossary 303
Notes 309




                                                    Contents ix
Illustr ations

Map of Ibn ʿArabī’s World   xxxiv
Poem 11 in the Ragıp Paşa Manuscript of the
  Tarjumān 298




                                              xi
Tr a nslator’s Introduction


Muḥyī al-­Dīn Ibn ʿArabī tells us that he compiled his famous vol-
ume of love poems, Tarjumān al-­ashwāq (“The Translator of De-
sires”), in 1214 ce during a visit to the Kaʿba shrine in Mecca.1
    Born in 1165 to a prosperous and politically connected family in
al-­Andalus, Ibn ʿArabī benefited from an immersive education in
religious, literary, and philosophical studies. At a young age, how-
ever, he chose to separate himself from court circles in favor of a
life of itinerant learning. For the next two decades, he was con-
stantly on the move through networks of Sufi mystics, religious
scholars, and poets, with weeks-­or monthslong stays in such An-
dalusian and North African cities as Seville, Fez, Marrakesh, and
Tunis. After two decades of travel, study, and contemplation, he
set out for Mecca—­only to be marooned in Cairo because of a
plague that left the city under quarantine.
    After finally reaching Mecca in 1202, he began to experience
visions that, by his own account, would inspire much of his vast
literary production over the next four decades. It was while circling
the Kaʿba that he encountered the mystical youth (young man or
boy, fatā) who inspired his monumental masterwork, The Meccan
Openings, which he would compose over the next three decades.
On another occasion, his encounter with the Kaʿba, personified,
prompted him to compose a series of love letters addressed to the
shrine itself, titled Diadem of Epistles, in an intricate and elegant
rhymed prose (sajʿ).2 And it was at the Kaʿba in 1202 that he en-
countered a young woman who fiercely critiqued each of the four
verses of a love poem he was reciting—­an experience that led him
to compose sixty more poems during a subsequent stay in Mecca



                                                                  xiii
and, eventually, to publish all sixty-­one under the title Tarjumān
al-­Ashwāq.
    After his first stay in Mecca (from 1202 to 1204), he resumed
his peripatetic life. His journeys would now take him through
cultural centers within the Islamic East: Mosul, Baghdad, Da-
mascus, Aleppo, and the Anatolian cities of Konya and Malatya
(Melitene). These journeys formed elliptical orbits around the
Kaʿba, to which he returned time and again. His itinerancy not-
withstanding, and despite the lack of formal institutional sup-
port, Ibn ʿArabī was prolific, and during the four decades follow-
ing his first arrival in Mecca he produced dozens of books, treatises,
and collections of poetry—­the latter composed in a variety of
genres and styles.
    In the second and third decades of the thirteenth century, Ibn
ʿArabī compiled a belletristic work, Sessions of the Righteous, into
which he placed hundreds of love poems composed by himself and
by earlier poets as well as remarks on the occasions during which
he recited such verses in the company of other scholars and poets.
Sessions of the Righteous includes most of the Tarjumān but places
the poems in different sequences, and within different thematic,
hermeneutical, and autobiographical settings.3
    By the time he settled in Damascus in 1223, Ibn ʿArabī was sur-
rounded by scholars and followers who were reading, editing, and
disseminating his works. There he completed the second edition
of the Meccan Openings as well as his classic work of mystical phi-
losophy, Ringstones of Wisdom.4 During the same period, he pro-
duced what is known as his “Great Dīwān,” which brought together
some 3,500 of his poetic compositions.5 At the time of his death in
1240 (638 of the Islamic calendar), he was well on the way to being
known as al-­shaykh al-­akbar or “the grand master” of Islamic mys-
tical thought.6

xiv Translator’s Introduction
   Ibn ʿArabī’s notoriety throughout premodern Islamic civiliza-
tions ensured that many of his works—­including the Tarjumān—­
would be preserved, disseminated, argued over, and passed on
through the centuries. But that same notoriety at times overshad-
owed the writing itself with its various controversies over—­for
instance—­his alleged monism or pantheism, the attacks on his
character and his orthodoxy leveled by the fourteenth-­century
Damascene preacher and jurist Ibn Taymiyya, and more recent
contentions relating to Sufism, colonialism, and modernity.
   Ibn ʿArabī himself offered contrasting accounts of the genesis
and intent of the Tarjumān poems in the course of his own autobio-
graphical and prefatory writings, and those accounts have been
passed on by subsequent generations down to the present. We
might call that metaliterature “The Tale of the Tarjumān,” with
three interrelated aspects: “The Romance of the Tarjumān,” “The
Trial of the Tarjumān,” and the “Allegory of the Tarjumān.”

Tarjumān al-­ashwāq
The first word of the title, which can be vocalized as either Tarjumān
or Turjumān, might be rendered as translator, translation, inter-
preter, interpretation, discloser, disclosure, guide, or guidebook.
The word is also closely related to the word for biography, tar-
jama.7 For whom, we might ask, do these poems translate, and
what might they disclose?
   Arabic poetry employs more than two dozen words that in the
lexicons are rendered as love, desire, passion, or longing. One of
those words is shawq (plural ashwāq [ash as in “hush” + wāq as in
English “walk”]). Ibn ʿArabī’s shawq is analogous to classical Greek
eros insofar as it was taken as a fundamental driving force within
human life, art, and thought. In relationship to the finite human
subject, shawq is infinite; and the poet-­lover within the poems is

                                              Translator’s Introduction xv
presented at once as the subject, victim, champion, and voice of
shawq-­conditioned human existence. The paradoxes of this
condition—­that love is both disease and cure, for example, or that
the lover longs to be near the beloved, even though nearness only
intensifies the longing—­pervade love lyrics across many traditions.
But within the broader context of Arabic poetry and song, and
within the Tarjumān in particular, these paradoxes play on particu-
larly acute and culturally specific associations.
   In pre-­Islamic and very early Islamic Arabic poetry of the sixth
and seventh centuries ce, erotic themes were primarily expressed
in the first movement of the classical Arabic ode (qaṣīda), a metri-
cally rigorous, end-­rhymed poem that began with the nasib, a
movement centered on remembrance of a lost beloved. In the tri-
partite ode common in the pre-­Islamic period, the nasib could then
lead into a journey-­quest and culminate in a galvanizing battle
boast, praise of the tribe, or panegyric to a king. Later poets tended
to compose bipartite odes consisting largely of nasib and journey
or nasib and panegyric.8
   By the end of the first century of Islam, a freestanding love
poem, known as ghazal, was emerging. Early Arabian ghazals
drew upon and intensified the nasib. The Arabic ghazal tradition
could take on various voices, including the tragic mode known as
ʿUdhrī (after the Arabian tribe that produced some of its famous
poets) and associated most famously with the figures of Majnūn
and Laylā. The poet, Qays, goes mad through his love of Laylā, a
madness that gives him his nickname of Majnūn Laylā (mad or
“jinned” for Laylā). In the legendary biographies of Majnūn, his
mad love is both a cause and a result of his inability to be with
her, and he ultimately perishes after love has emaciated him. He
and other ghazal poet-­lovers become “martyrs” to love, and early
Sufi writings present them as models for the adepts who perish

xvi Translator’s Introduction
and, by passing away from themselves, become one with the di-
vine beloved.
    The other major style of early ghazal takes on a more urbane
voice. In this style or mode, known as ʿUmarite after its most im-
portant early master, ʿUmar bin abī Rabiʿa (who died ca. 700), the
poet-­lover not only mourns the loss of his beloved(s) but also boasts
of his amatory adventures or turns his language into a form of flirta-
tion. Yet even as the styles and subgenres of Arabic ghazal contin-
ued to evolve, one core nasib motif remained, explicitly or implic-
itly, at the heart of any love lyric: the poet’s encounter with the
aṭlāl—­the ruins or traces of the beloved’s abandoned campsite.
    The act of poesis emerges from the poet’s decoding of the aṭlāl
and his realization that these are not the traces of just any camp,
but of the camp struck by the beloved in her journey away from
him. With that moment of recognition, the poetic voice surges.
Through contagion, other sites and features can take on the power
of the aṭlāl: the mere mention of one of the stations of the beloved’s
journey away from the poet; a scent of the Eastwind that carries
news of the beloved’s location; the sight and scent of the moringa,
a desert tree associated with the beauty and grace of the beloved;
the verse of an earlier poet in memory of his lost beloved, a verse
that might contain a fragment of a verse of a still earlier poet. The
contagion extends across space through messengers like the East-
wind and its analogues, and across time through the resonance of
a verse or phrase through poems of the past.
    By the tenth century ce, court circles in urban centers like
Baghdad were compiling collections of ghazal lyrics and the ro-
mantic legends associated with the early Arabian poet-­lovers and
their beloveds, collections that culminated with the Great Book
of Songs, a massive collection of poetry and romance narratives.
The author-­compiler, Abū al-­Faraj al-­Isfahānī (d. 967), provided

                                             Translator’s Introduction xvii
descriptions of the musical modes employed in the performance
of the verses he quoted. Even though his descriptive notation does
not allow a modern reconstruction of the modes and melodies in-
dicated, it offers clear indication of the mutual permeation of poetic
verses and musical performance in high Abbasid culture.
   This urban literature of ghazal poetry, song, and Bedouin ro-
mance emerged parallel with the development of a variety of odes
and ghazals in which the ruins of a great city, palace, or civilization
took the place of the Bedouin campsite as the site and source of
longing (see appendix 4 for an example).9 The various voices of love
(tragic, triumphant, sorrowful, provocative, pious, and ribald in
turn) continued to inflect the ghazal tradition. A stanzaic form
known as the garland poem (muwashshaḥa), which flourished es-
pecially in the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries, offered yet an-
other mold for ghazal.10 By the time of Ibn ʿArabī, a Persian ghazal
tradition was also ascendant, and later epochs would see the emer-
gence of ghazal traditions in Ottoman, Urdu, Punjabi, and other
languages. Each of these traditions shared major themes of the Ara-
bic ghazal, but they were also bound more specifically to a particu-
lar poetic genre.11
   The poetic imaginary embraced a correspondence between love
and religion. Love poetry had its own version of ḥalāl and ḥarām
(allowable and prohibited, in the vocabulary of religious obser-
vance) and its own sunna and sharīʿa (sacred path and law, in the
same). Love and fate served as judges and muftis (authors of legal
religious opinions). The poets also performed a theology of love:
just as the divine reality in its infinite depth exceeds all naming and
description, so does the beloved or love itself.
   No aspect of religious teachings and practice is more central to
the Tarjumān than the hajj pilgrimage, which for those who are
able to perform it marks the culmination of devotional life. At the

xviii Translator’s Introduction
center of the hajj experience are three rituals that carry the pilgrim
back in time to the origins of Islam and of the world itself and for-
ward to meeting the creator on the day of judgment. Pilgrims ritu-
ally circle the Kaʿba shrine that, according to Islamic tradition, was
constructed by Abraham. At ʿArafa, a plain and adjacent mount
about twelve miles from Mecca from which the prophet Muḥammad
delivered his farewell address, pilgrims stand throughout the day
and chant the words “here I am for you” that all souls will recite as
they meet their creator. At Minā, pilgrims cast pebbles at three
stone pillars and, on the holiest day of the Muslim year, reenact
Abraham’s sacrifice.12 The Tarjumān returns time and again to these
rites as it articulates the experiential dimensions of shawq. At the
same time, it mixes the stations of the hajj and the stations of the
beloved’s journey, tying together the poetic and religious solemni-
ties of place, and establishing an implicit homology between the
poet’s wandering from site to site in pursuit of the beloved and a
pilgrim’s station-­by-­station movement during the pilgrimage.
   Just as ritual reenactment can collapse time, bringing the pilgrim
back to the origins of the faith and bringing those sacred origins
into the present, so too does the practice of ḥadīth transmission,
which becomes a core element within the Tarjumān’s poetics. A
hadith consists of a report of the words or actions of the prophet
Muḥammad or his companions, along with the transmission gene-
alogy (isnād): the chain of transmitters who passed the report,
generation to generation, from the birth of Islam down to the time
of the final individual in the chain. Islamic culture in the thirteenth
century was both literate and oral, and hadith transmission linked
the two modes. Although the written hadith compilations were
considered authoritative by most Sunni Muslims, the pious still
traveled widely to hear oral hadiths from a living transmitter who
himself had heard them orally from a predecessor back to the time

                                              Translator’s Introduction xix
of Muḥammad. Such a practice emphasized the vast temporal dis-
tance between the Prophet and the present but also, through
nested levels of embedded quotation, collapsed it: at the moment
of hearing a hadith transmitted, the hearer was hearing the words
of the Prophet as if they were in a certain sense being spoken live.
Early on, the ḥadīth-­isnād model was appropriated by other liter-
ary (and not necessarily religious) genres. Poetry anthologists,
historians, and storytellers would provide isnāds for the verses and
stories they recounted. In the Tarjumān, the poet presents the
words of the beloved or her companions as transmitted through a
chain of natural phenomena or interior emotive states stretching
back to the primordial moments of early Islam, or back further to
the garden of Eden, or even to before the creation of the world.
   Of the lyric mode of expression, literary theorist Northrop Frye
wrote that the poet normally pretends to be talking to himself or
to someone else: “a spirit of Nature, a muse, a personal friend, a
lover, a god, a personified abstraction or a natural object.”13 In the
case of the Tarjumān, we might add to that list the critic or scold
(al-­ʿādhil) and note that in defending himself against the critic, the
poet is also addressing himself, the critic within. Here Ibn ʿArabī
animates the conventional image of the scold in medieval Arabic
poetry and brings us into its heart. The poems of the Tarjumān
destabilize the notion of a single addressee, shifting from the be-
loved, to muse, to the personification of beauty, to friend, to critic,
to the interiorized critic within the poet, to an element of nature,
to all lovers everywhere, and through all of the above in either sin-
gular or plural, masculine or feminine. Both the Qur’an and classi-
cal Arabic poetry (each in its own distinct way) contain radical
shifts in voice, constantly engaging the reader in adjusting to apos-
trophic changes in addresser and addressee. Indeed, classical Ara-
bic rhetoricians considered this feature, called iltifāt (turning, shift-

xx Translator’s Introduction
ing, wrapping), a distinctive and audacious aspect of Arabic
expression. In the Tarjumān, the persona of the poet-­lover also
shifts. It presents itself conventionally as male but may speak in the
first-­person singular (I) or plural (we), even as it speaks to various
personae, including itself (within self-­address), or of various
personae (including itself ).
   Take, for example, the first verses of the Tarjumān where the
poet ponders where “they are,” what “they know,” and whether
“they are safe.” Readers familiar with the Arabic tradition will eas-
ily infer that the verse evokes the beloved and the other women of
her tribe traveling away from the poet, but will also understand
that the plural serves as a metonym for the beloved. At the same
time, an echo can be heard of the same question as addressed by
poets of other beloveds and, more widely, within the world of
shawq conjured by the poet, by other past and present star-­crossed
lovers.
   In other poems the poet shifts from the singular to the plural in
referring to himself. From early in the tradition, the singular/plural
shifting was more than a movement between two synonyms. The
“we” assumes a specific tonality that contrasts with the “I,” often
taking on the possibility of speaking as lovers generally or the pos-
sibility of mutuality between lover and beloved (“we” were in love,
“we” were separated against our will), though the poet’s effort to
express or create such mutuality can be ironized or undermined by
the poem itself. The “we” can also include the wider group of which
the poet was, and poetically purports to still be, a part: family,
tribe, nation, and civilization—­that is, the group to which the poet
once belonged, longs to still belong to, and poetically strives to
belong to again.14 Similarly, the stations of the beloved in her jour-
ney away from the poet can spur longing for those sites of earlier
happiness, for a homeland, a sense of belonging, and a lost youth.

                                              Translator’s Introduction xxi
The beloved can be male or female, pubescent or postpubescent,
married or unmarried, slave or free, divine or human.
   In the Tarjumān, the beloved is primarily imagined as female,
but there are significant appearances of the beloved as male as well,
and sometimes the gender switch can take place within a single
poem. The Tarjumān consists of ever-­repeated acts of reenchant-
ment as the beloved is brought back to the present and the with-
ered world is revived. But the poems are also fevered with the
knowledge that such a rebirth can only last an instant and must be
constantly repeated.

The Tale of the Tarjumān
In what most scholars believe to be his first preface to the Tarjumān,
Ibn ʿArabī tells us that the poems were inspired by a young woman
named Niẓām, who was the daughter and niece, respectively, of
two Persian scholars, a brother and sister, who had settled in
Mecca. I’ve rendered the word niẓām—­which in Arabic means “or-
dered arrangement”—­as “harmony” to reflect the wordplay within
the poem and the ambiguity between its possible meanings as a
common noun or a female name. Niẓām’s reputed role in the inspi-
ration of Ibn ʿArabī’s poetry has drawn comparisons to the role of
Beatrice in Dante’s poetry and thought.15
   The poems of the Tarjumān do indeed contain erotic dialectic
between the Arab poet-­lover persona, a “son of Yemen” as he refers
to himself, and a beloved who represents for him the quintessential
non-­Arab (ʿajamī) civilization of Persia. In addition to the personal
affection Ibn ʿArabī may have had for Niẓām, the Tarjumān’s
Arabic-­Persian dynamic may reflect the wider cultural symbiosis
within thirteenth-­century Islamic civilization. Although Ibn ʿArabī
never acknowledges knowing Persian or listening to Persian po-
etry, he was a man of profound linguistic gifts, someone who had

xxii Translator’s Introduction
Persian poets and scholars among his companions and who spent
considerable time in Anatolia where Persian flourished as an ad-
ministrative and literary language. He would not have been imper-
vious to contemporary developments in Persian ghazal and
Persian-­language Sufi literature.
   In his other preface, Ibn ʿArabī relates that while he was circum-
ambulating the temple of the Kaʿba, some poetry came to his mind.
He left the paved central area around the Kaʿba to avoid disturbing
other pilgrims and recited the verses on the sandy periphery. Al-
though they have been included as poem 1 in the Tarjumān, Ibn
ʿArabī does not claim authorship of them, leaving their author
indeterminate.
   No sooner had he begun reciting, Ibn ʿArabī tells us, than he felt
a jolt between his shoulders “from a hand softer than undyed silk.”
When he turned around he found there before him a maiden
(jāriya, an unmarried woman, usually a young female slave or freed
slave). He tells us that she was from among the Rūm, meaning that
she was from areas of Anatolia, which were or had been under the
control of the Byzantine Roman Empire. At the time, the word
could designate Christians specifically or (as was the case with the
poet Jalāl al-­Dīn Rūmī who settled in Anatolia in the early thir-
teenth century) Muslims living in the former Christian territory.
The jāriya fiercely criticizes each of the four verses, refuting each
part of them and rebuking Ibn ʿArabī for reciting verses unbecom-
ing of a personage of his stature. When Ibn ʿArabī asks her name,
she responds that he could call her by the nickname Qurrat al-­ʿAyn,
an endearment that means “comfort for the eye.”
   Interpreters and translators have commonly viewed Qurrat al-­
ʿAyn as being identical with Niẓām. Indeed, Ibn ʿArabī’s suggestion
at the end of his Qurrat al-­ʿAyn account that he would come to
know the young woman well seems to support that reading, as does

                                           Translator’s Introduction xxiii
the similarity in language in his homages to the young woman’s
beauty, artistry, and wisdom in both the Niẓām and Qurrat al-­ʿAyn
prefaces. However, Ibn ʿArabī defines Niẓām emphatically as being
of the finest Persian heritage but describes Qurrat al-­ʿAyn as of
Christian or Muslim Anatolian background. Ibn ʿArabī’s fascination
with Christian cultic practices and theology runs throughout his
writings, and allusions to Christian ritual and Trinitarian debate
can be found in several poems of the Tarjumān, allusions that are
expanded upon in his commentary. Qurrat al-­ʿAyn, though a jāriya
of possible Christian background, might well have converted to
Islam, and thus it would not be surprising to find her visiting the
Kaʿba.16
   Was Niẓām a historical personage either as a cherished acquain-
tance or wife of the poet, or was she a personification of beauty?
She may have been both. The social detail of her family of illustrious
scholars was quite specific, and had Ibn ʿArabī invented the story,
it would have been easily refuted by his contemporaries. Yet the
depiction of her in the preface and the allusions to a Niẓām figure
in the poems place her within a visionary imaginary as beauty, elo-
quence, and grace par excellence. Similarly, was Qurrat al-­ʿAyn a
historical personage, and if so, was she Niẓām? Was she a visionary
apparition? Or was she a development of a long literary history of
jāriya-­savants at the Kaʿba, a literary motif that makes a strong ap-
pearance in Ibn ʿArabī’s own Sessions of the Righteous?17 These
choices may not be mutually exclusive. The romance of the
Tarjumān is powerfully told, and because Ibn ʿArabī’s writings
about the Tarjumān are, like everything he wrote, brilliantly as-
sociative, elusive, and tied into everything else he has written,
these questions are not likely to be resolved at the level of histori-
cal biography, any more than the accounts of Qays and Laylā and
other famous lovers and poets gathered in the Great Book of Songs

xxiv Translator’s Introduction
are amenable to distinctions between historicity and legend. How-
ever, while the compiler of the Great Book of Songs wove together
traditions regarding the poets and lovers of the past to form ro-
mances, in the case of the Tarjumān, Ibn al-­ʿArabī served as his own
romancier.18
   No sooner had it begun to circulate than the Tarjumān was con-
fronted with controversy. A jurist in Aleppo had rebuked Ibn
ʿArabī’s claim made in the Niẓām preface that the erotic homages to
her reflected a realm of spiritual love and refined and intimate mysti-
cal knowledge or connaissance (maʿrifa). The critic suggested that
Ibn ʿArabī, who was known as a man of religion, was attempting to
hide the true nature of the poems behind an allegorical façade. Two
of Ibn ʿArabī’s companions appealed to Ibn ʿArabī to respond to the
criticism, and he did so in the form of a short, versified apologia,
followed by a lengthy verse-­by-­verse commentary on the poems
that he titled Priceless Treasures.19 An assembly of religious and liter-
ary notables convened to adjudicate the controversy over the
poems, during which Ibn ʿAdīm (d. 1262)—­another jurist, who
would become one of the most important historical chroniclers of
medieval Syria—­recited a large part of the commentary in the pres-
ence of both the poet and his critic. Ibn ʿArabī adds that after the
event concluded, the critic declared himself persuaded that the
poems were indeed allegorical expressions for the Sufi’s love for and
journey toward the divine beloved.20
   Priceless Treasures inaugurated a new tradition of extensive mys-
tical commentaries on Arabic love poetry. That tradition bears
similarities to Song of Songs commentaries in medieval Judaism
and Christianity, and remarkable structural similarities to the Span-
ish poet John of the Cross’s commentary on his erotic poem “Can-
ticle of the Soul,” which was modeled on the biblical Song of Songs
(although there is little chance that John would have had access to

                                               Translator’s Introduction xxv
Ibn ʿArabī’s work in either the original or translation).21 Yet there
is a twist, as there always seems to be in Ibn ʿArabī’s accounts of the
Tarjumān. While the Aleppan jurist criticized Ibn ʿArabī for dis-
avowing the erotic nature of his poems, the maiden at the Kaʿba
rebuked the first poem for not being extravagant enough in its ex-
pression of desire, that is, for not culminating in the complete pass-
ing away of the poet-­lover in love for the beloved.
    Ibn ʿArabī may be best known for his mystical philosophy, which
took shape around the notion of waḥdat al-­wujūd (“the unity of
existence”), although he nowhere employed that phrase. The on-
tological and metaphysical aspects of such thought are not ad-
dressed explicitly in the Tarjumān. However, several of the poems
do contain intimations of the Sufi notion of “mystical union.” In
Sufi thought, God cannot be known as an object: the infinite exis-
tence of the divine reality exceeds the knower-­known duality and
cannot be described or even referenced in human language. The
goal of the religious and mystical path is the annihilation or passing
away (fanā’) of the ego-­self in union with the divine beloved. For
Ibn ʿArabī, the key sacred source expounding such a union comes
in the form of a “divine saying” (a hadith that, instead of reporting
words or actions of Muḥammad, reports words of God addressed
to Muḥammad). In this saying, the divine speaker states that noth-
ing is dearer to him than his servant drawing near through devo-
tions above and beyond those required of the believer. When the
servant draws near, “I [the divine speaker] am the hearing with
which he hears, the seeing with which he sees, the hands with
which he holds, and the feet with which he walks.”22
    In a famous opening passage from Ringstones of Wisdom, Ibn
ʿArabī presents the human being in its archetypal state, represented
by the prelapsarian Adam, as the “polishing of the mirror” that is
the world. Insofar as that mirror is polished, it reflects the image of

xxvi Translator’s Introduction
God, and in that image the divine and the human are one. For the
human being in space and time, such polishing occurs at the mo-
ment of fanā’, when a person passes away from the ego-­self. At that
point the divine persona manifests itself in the polished mirror of
the heart. Because God or “the Real” is infinite, beyond space and
time, its manifestation in space and time lasts only for a moment.
In every new moment the manifestation changes. Whoever at-
tempts to hold onto the image locks himself into the dead husk of
that manifestation and precludes himself from receiving new mani-
festations of the divine. The goal is to let go of the previous image
in order to be receptive to the divine appearance the next moment
within the polished mirror of the heart. A bittersweet dynamism
haunts the Tarjumān: the beloved(s) or personified embodiments
of beauty can never be possessed. The beloved appears to the poet
and in her apparition he passes away, only to find himself cast back
into the world of time and loss.23

  ***

Was Ibn ʿArabī a Sufi poet? He was certainly a contemplative mystic
(muʿtabir, “one who observes and ponders”) and Sufi. He also com-
posed a large number of Sufi poems, that is, poems that are imbued
with the vocabulary of Sufi psychology, cosmology, and metaphys-
ics. Yet the poems of the Tarjumān do not fit neatly into that cat-
egory. Had Ibn ʿArabī not been known as their author, they might
not have been classified as Sufi poems, although they would have
been appreciated by Sufis, who were steeped in the tradition of
ghazal and nasib. Many cherished poems within the Islamic
tradition—­including the Tarjumān as well as poems by Ibn ʿArabī’s
younger contemporaries, al-­Fārīḍ and al-­Shushtarī, not to mention
a treasury of Persian, Ottoman, and Urdu ghazals—­tread a fine line
between sacred and profane.24 That phenomenon makes perfect

                                           Translator’s Introduction xxvii
sense from the perspective of Ibn ʿArabī’s conception of shawq.
Shawq, eros, is infinite. It cannot be confined into mutually exclu-
sive categories of human and divine. At the most basic level, the
shawq at the heart of pre-­Islamic and Islamic love poetry may
carry within it an inherently mystical dimension. In shawq, the
normal rules of logic are suspended, and the human being opens
onto the unlimited, a force that cannot be contained in space or
time. Like the divine reality, shawq kills and brings to life, exists
without and within, is both beyond the world and deep in the
heart of the lover.
    Much of the reception to the Tarjumān has been driven by Ibn
ʿArabī’s commentary, which is focused on tying the poetry to Sufi
psychology and cosmology and which distracts attention from the
poems as poetry.25 Yet the mystical thought touched upon in the
commentary emerged in fully developed form decades later with
such works as the Meccan Openings and Ringstones of Wisdom. It
may be more accurate to view that poetry as foreshadowing the
later teachings. Far from being versified philosophy or attractive
illustrations of his philosophical ideas arrived at independently, the
poems of the Tarjumān were in a very real sense generative of Ibn
ʿArabī’s vision of existence as a shawq-­driven process born of the
tension between a creator’s longing to create and the paradoxical
longing of the nonexistent creature’s to be and, once existent, to
return to its source.

Translating the Tarjumān
In 1911 the British scholar Reynold Nicholson published what was
both the first translation of the Tarjumān as well as the first printed
edition of it; a pioneering work that has been read and appreciated
over the decades. The more recent history of Tarjumān translations



xxviii Translator’s Introduction
began with the 1977 Spanish rendition of Vicente Cantarino, and
since that time the Tarjumān has received generous attention from
Spanish, French, and German translators. (An account and appre-
ciation of this translation history is found in appendix 7.) This vol-
ume constitutes the first edition and first complete English transla-
tion of the Tarjumān since Nicholson.
   To translate classical Arabic poetry entails finding a balance be-
tween conservation and compensation. Each poem of the
Tarjumān, as is the case with most classical Arabic poetry, follows
one of about a dozen standard meters, and the poetry’s pulse is
quickened by the tension between the meter and the syntax.26
When the syntactical pause falls in the middle of a metrical foot, it
creates a tension; when it falls at the end of a foot it provides a re-
lease. Arabic meters, like those of classical Greek and Latin, are
quantitative instead of accentual. (A syllable is long if it includes a
long vowel or a short vowel followed by two consonants.) Arabic
meters can employ metrical feet of two, three, four, or five sylla-
bles.27 To offer one example, I present below the opening verse of
poem 11 from the Tarjumān. It is in the meter known as ṭawīl,
which is based on alternating three-­and four-­syllable feet. The
three-­syllable foot can follow one of two patterns: ̆ ̄ ̄ or ̆ ̄ ̆ . The
four-­syllable foot can also follow one of two patterns: ̆ ̄ ̄ ̄ or ̆ ̄ ̆ ̄ ;
and as with other meters, a line can end with a full foot or a short-
ened (catalectic) one.
   The first verse of poem 11 reads as follows in my translation:

   Gentle now, doves
     of the sprigberry and
   moringa, don’t add your
     sighs to my heart-ache



                                                 Translator’s Introduction xxix
   Here below is a scansion, transliteration, and word-­by-­word
gloss of the verse:

    ̆ ̄ ̄ /   ̆      ̄       ̄     ̄/ ̆ ̄    ̆ / ̆                        ̄ ̄ ̄
   alā yā ḥamāmāti l-­arākati                                            wa l-­bānī
   oh! O doves                  of the sprigberry                        and moringa

              
       ̆       ̄     ̄ / ̆ ̄      ̆ ̄ / ̆      ̄          ̄/       ̆ 	                
                                                                                   ̄ ̄ ̄
      taraffaqna lā tuḍiʿfna bi-­sh-­shajwi                                       ashjānī
      be gentle don’t increase by your lament                                     my sorrows

   In addition, the classical Arabic poem, however long, follows a
single end rhyme from beginning to end, another feature that is not
amenable to modern English poetry. Equally impervious to direct
translation is jinās, the combination of etymological play, punning,
and repetitions of consonants that marked what was called the
“new style” of poetry in ninth-­century Baghdad and that recurs in
several of the Tarjumān poems.28
   Classical Arabic poetics is also based on the independent line of
verse; enjambment is rare, and end rhymes provide a strong sense
of closure to each verse. That verse-­by-­verse independence engages
the reader in bridging the semantic and rhetorical gap between
verses, a gap intensified by the Tarjumān’s frequent if not incessant
apostrophic turning. I employ punctuation sparingly to preserve
this critical aspect of Ibn ʿArabī’s poetic voice. I have eschewed
end-­stops altogether, with line breaks, capitalization, and spacing
serving as guides where needed.
   I have used stanzas of two, three, or four lines, depending on the
poem, to correspond to an Arabic verse. I have numbered the Ara-
bic verses and their parallel English stanzas at intervals of 5, 10, 15,
20, 25, and 30. On rare occasions I have found it necessary to con-
dense the translation of two Arabic verses into one stanza or to

xxx Translator’s Introduction
expand the translation of one verse into two stanzas. In those cases
the design of the facing-­page text has been adjusted to make these
adjustments transparent. The verse numbers in the English cor-
respond to their numbered Arabic counterparts in those cases as
well, in order to clarify the relationship between the two pages.
   The poems of the Tarjumān redound with place-­names and the
names of various trees, bushes, and herbs that have no direct equiv-
alent in anglophone lands. Each specific place and plant is embed-
ded in a web of literary, cultural, and religious associations that
reflect topography and botany but extend them mythopoetically.
For the Bedouin, or for the pilgrim traveling through the arid re-
gions of central and northern Arabia, the herbs, shrubs, flowers,
and trees they encountered took on a sensual impact that those of
us from moderate climes can scarcely imagine.29 To approach an
oasis, even an oasis consisting of little more than a few trees and
shrubs, is to be overcome with the intense fragrance of wet earth
and of the flora that grow there. I have resisted simplifying matters
by removing the specific plant names, a simplification that would
strip the poetry of a core element. However, in order to fit those
names naturally within the English cadence of the translation, I
employ an adapted and flexible transliteration that allows the Ara-
bic words to fit within an English accentual rhythm and acoustics,
without making the name in question unrecognizable to Arabic
speakers. In some cases, I translate place-­names on the basis of
their root meanings (Sand Hill), and plant names where there is an
appropriate English equivalent (tamarisk, lote, and artemisia).
   A similar rationale guides the approach to prophets mentioned
in the Qur’an, many of whom have biblical analogues. I employ the
Arabic, Qur’anic names rather than the common English versions
of the biblical names. Mūsā rather than Moses, Sulaymān rather
than Solomon, ʿĪsā rather than Jesus, and Idrīs, the Qur’anic prophet

                                            Translator’s Introduction xxxi
who was associated with the biblical Enoch by Islamic tradition.
Preserving the Arabic allows those names to fit into a translation
that includes many names of Arabic lovers and beloveds as well
(such as Qays, Laylā, Mayya, and Ghaylān), and, in the natural flow
of the verse, it gives readers a palpable sense of the power these
words hold for readers, or listeners, in Arabic. It also serves to mark
the distinctiveness of Qur’anic prophetic figures vis-­à-­vis their bib-
lical counterparts. While the Qur’anic and biblical accounts can
overlap in substance, they can also diverge, sometimes starkly. The
Qur’anic ʿĪsā, like the biblical Jesus, is the messiah (masīḥ) and,
according to hadith accounts, will return at the end of times. Like
his biblical counterpart, he was born of a virgin mother and raised
the dead to life. In contrast to his biblical counterpart, however, he
is not considered the Son of God.

   ***

In a short introductory remark to a poem that he presents in Ses-
sions of the Righteous, Ibn ʿArabī provides a key to his own under-
standing of himself as a translator of desires. Eros (shawq, ashwāq)
comes in two forms or “languages”: longing for what is in the past,
or distant; and longing for what is near, or at hand, or for what one
already has, which Ibn ʿArabī calls ishtiyāq. The introduction pres-
ents the poem as, in fact, authored by the fully personified Ashwāq:
“Among the poems that the Ashwāq composed (naẓamat) in the
language of ishtiyāq are what I said regarding Niẓām. . . .”30 Niẓām
emerges here not only as the subject of the poem that follows but
as the very act of composing it. In theological terms, she transcends
the poem that is about her, but she is also immanent within it. As
a muse, Niẓām is not only the beloved who inspires the poet’s
verses but the creative spark within them.



xxxii Translator’s Introduction
   Meaning in Tarjumān al-­ashwāq is in constant movement—­like
beings, like the longings that “come upon” us as voices, apparitions,
and emotions; like the beloved in her journey from station to sta-
tion; like the mystic’s heart being transformed each moment; like
the ever-­changing manifestations of the beloved in the mirror of a
human heart. To be is to be moved from site to site, from word to
word, from self to self, ever lost and ever regained—­always in trans-
lation. Poet, lover, and beauty itself are in a state of constant bewil-
derment, which forms the subject of the first poem of the Tarjumān,
recurs throughout it, and culminates in the final poem of the
collection.




                                            Translator’s Introduction xxxiii
                                                                          Sivas
Cordoba         Murcia                                         Konya      Malatya
Seville             Bejaia
            Granada          Tunis                                                Aleppo     Mosul
                                                                      Antioch
                Tlemcen
          Fez                                                                   Damascus          Baghdad
                                                                   Jerusalem                      Hilla
   Marrakech                                                                               Kufa
                                                      Alexandria
                                                                                                  Basra
                                                             Cairo



                                                                                       Medina

                                                                               Jedda   Mecca


                                           0           500 miles

                                           0      500 kilometers

                                     Map of Ibn ʿArabī’s World
Ack now ledgments


My deepest gratitude to the many who have contributed their
voices, insight, and encouragement to this project over the years.
   And to Wayel Azmeh, along with Sara Aziz, Clay Lemar, Nick
Lorenz, and Hilmi Okur, who offered invaluable assistance with
the collation of manuscripts for this Arabic edition. To Izzet Coban
for his proofreading of the penultimate draft of the Arabic edition.
To Wayel again and Ahmad Arafat for their valuable perspectives
on key passages from Dīwān al-­Maʿārif and Sessions of the
Righteous.
   To the Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi Society, which has established an
international forum, a journal, annual symposia, a digital manu-
script collection, and library, all devoted to Ibn ʿArabī’s writings
and heritage. To society members and organizers, including Pablo
Beneito, Aaron Cass, Grenville Collins, Stephen Hirtenstein, David
Hornsby, Cecilia Twinch, Richard Twinch, Jane Carroll, Jane
Clark, Bob Towns, Caroline Notcutt, Martin Notcutt, Maren Glea-
son, Johnny Mercer, Christopher Ryan O’Hawick, Frances Ryan,
Alison Yiangou, and Nick Yiangou, for arranging and hosting the
society’s symposia; and to Jane Clark for helping me with access to
the Tarjumān manuscripts consulted for this edition.
   To La Corónica, Poetry, CDL Press, Gorgias Press, the Journal
of Arabic Literature, and the Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi
Society for publishing earlier versions of some of my Tarjumān
translations; with special appreciation to Stephen Hirtenstein and



                                                               xxxv
Michael Tiernan at the Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi Society,
to Simone Fattal at Post-­Apollo Press, and to Peter Cole at Ibis
Editions.
   To Etel Adnan, Erin Atwell, William Chittick, Francesca Chubb-­
Confer, Ahmed Ghani, Elizabeth Kendick, Rachel Krauser, Susan
Lee, Lauren Osborne, Jawad Qureshi, Elizabeth Sartell, John Sey-
bold, Jaroslav Stetkevych, Suzanne Pinckney Stetkevych, Bernard
McGinn, James Morris, Louay Safi, Ruth Ost, Fazlur Rahman, and
Nasrin Qadr. To Lourdes María Alvarez, Walter Feldman, Seemi
Bushra Ghazi, Emil Homerin, Lenny Lewison, Paul Losensky, and
Scott Kugle for our times spent immersed in the translations of
Islamicate love poetry. To my students at Haverford College and
the University of Chicago, whose questions, insights, and engage-
ment have been a continual source of inspiration. To dear friends
in Morocco, Tunisia, and Syria who offered me their hospitality,
wit, wisdom, and passion for poetry over many stays and visits.
Special appreciation to Lori Holland for her design of the Arabic
text and the facing-­page Arabic-­English alignment.
   Most immediately, and immeasurably, to Peter Cole, Richard
Sieburth, and Rosanna Warren for the care, graciousness, sensitiv-
ity, and rigor of their readings and comments on successive drafts
of the translation; and to Peter again for his meticulous readings of
the entire manuscript.
                                                        Chicago
                                                     May 5, 2020




xxxvi Acknowledgments
Note on A r a bic Na mes


In order to facilitate focus and flow, Arabic terms and names within
the translation in this volume follow a modified and flexible trans-
literation system. Outside of the translation, the standardized trans-
literation protocol is employed. In the glossary, both the poetically
modified and the standard transliteration are provided.
    The following signs are employed in the translation:

  * An acute accent indicates the stress accent of a syllable, as
    in Khawárnaq, the name of an ancient monument in the
    area between Arabia and Iraq.
  * The vocable â takes a stress accent within the English ren-
    dition of the poetry and is pronounced like the “a” in
    “llama”; as in Râma, the name of a relay station in Arabia
    associated by Arabic poets with the lost beloved.
  * The vocable ā takes a stress accent within the English ren-
    dition of the poetry and is pronounced like the “a” in “bad-
    ger”; as in Hājir, a relay station on the pilgrimage route
    from Iraq to Medina and Mecca.
  * The vocable ū takes a stress accent within the English ren-
    dition of the poetry and is pronounced like the “oo” in
    “mood”; as with Zarūd, a way station south of the Nefūd
    desert in north-­central Arabia.
  * The vocable ī takes a stress accent within the English ren-
    dition of the poetry and is pronounced like the “ee” in




                                                                xxxvii
    “free”; as with Hadītha, a city on the Euphrates River in
    Iraq.
  * The markers ʿ for the letter ‘ayn and ’ for the letter hamza in-
    dicate two sounds that to the non-­Arabic speaker are indis-
    tinguishable and can best be thought of a short catch in the
    breath, as in Shiʿite and Qur’an. For Arabic speakers the ‘ayn
    is a deep guttural and the hamza a glottal stop.




xxxviii Note on Arabic Names
The Translator of Desires
                                                                          ‫‪1‬‬




                ‫ت ِش ْع ِري َه ْل َد َرْوا‬
                                         ‫لَْي َ‬
    ‫ـب َمـلَـ ُكـوا‬ ‫َي قـَـ ْل ـ ٍ‬
                                ‫أ َّ‬
              ‫َوف ـُـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـؤ ِاد ي لَـ ـ ـ ْـو َد َرى‬
    ‫ب َسلَ ُكوا‬‫َي ِش ْع ٍ‬    ‫أ َّ‬
                ‫أَتـ ـُ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـر ُاه ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْـم َسـ ــلِـ ـ ُـم ـ ـوا‬
    ‫اه ـ ْـم َهـلَـ ُكـوا‬‫أ َْم تـ ـُ َـر ُ‬

                               ‫ـار أ َْربَـ ـ ـ ُ‬
                  ‫ـاب ٱ ْلـَـ َـوى‬            ‫َحـ ـ َ‬
    ‫ِف ٱ ْلََوى َو ْٱرتـَبَ ُكوا‬




‫‪2‬‬
Bewildered




I wish I knew if they knew
      whose heart they’ve taken


Or my heart knew which
      high-­ridge track they follow


Do you see them safe
      or perishing?


The lords of love are in love
      ensnared, bewildered




                                      Bewildered   3
                                                                                            ‫‪2‬‬




                      ‫يسا‬  ‫ِ‬
                       ‫َمــا َر َّحـلُـوا يـَـ ْـو َم بَــا نُـوا ٱ لْ ـب ـَُّـزَل ٱ لْع َ‬
      ‫ـســا‬        ‫َّ‬               ‫ِ‬                                ‫َِّ‬
         ‫إ ل َوقَـ ـ ْد َحَ ـلُ ـوا ف ـي ـهــا ٱ ل ـطـ َـواويـ َ‬



                      ‫ـاظ َمــالِـ َكـ ٍـة‬
                                       ‫َلـ ـ ـ ِ‬       ‫ِ ِ‬                          ‫ِ‬
                                             ‫م ـ ْـن ُك ـ ِّـل فَــات ـ َك ــة ْٱل َْ‬
      ‫ـســا‬        ‫َتَــا ُل ـَـا فـ ـ ــو َق َعـ ــر ِش ٱلـ ــد ِّ ِ‬
         ‫ُّر بـ ْلـقـيـ َ‬              ‫َْ ْ‬



                 ‫اج تـََرى‬
                        ‫ٱلز َج ِ‬
                             ‫ص ْر ِح ُّ‬       ‫إِ َذ ا تََش ْ‬
                                      ‫َّت َعلَى َ‬
      ‫يسا‬‫ٍ ِ ِ ِِ ِ‬
       ‫َشْ ًسا َعلَى فـَلَك ف ح ْجر إ ْد ر َ‬



                 ‫ـحـ ِـظ َمـْنـ ِـطـ ُقـ َـهــا‬
                                             ‫ـت بِــٱ لـلَّـ ْ‬
                                                            ‫ُْي ـ ِي إِ َذ ا قـَـتـَـلَـ ْ‬
              ‫ِ ِِ ِ‬                               ‫ِ‬
         ‫َك ـأَنـَّـ َـه ــا ع ـْن ـ َـد َم ــا ُْت ـي ــي ب ــه عـيـ َ‬
      ‫ـســى‬



‫]‪[5‬‬              ‫تـَـ ْـوَراتـُـ َـه ــا لَـ ـ ْـو ُح َس ــاقـَـيْـ َـه ــا َســنًــا َوأَنَ ــا‬
          ‫أَت ـْ ـ ـلُـ ــو َوأ َْد ُر ُس ـ ـ ـ َـه ـ ـ ــا ك ـ ـأَنـَّ ـ ِـي ُم ـ َ‬
      ‫ـوس ــى‬




‫‪4‬‬
Release




They led the red-­roans
   away the day
of departure, with peacocks
   high in howdahs


Who take possession
   with glances that kill
like Bilqīs of Sheba
   on her throne of pearl


She crosses the polished
   glass and you see
the sun circling
   in Idrīs’s sphere


What her glance kills
   her speech revives,
bringing the dead
   to life, like ʿĪsā


Like Torah’s tablets                    [5]
   her legs in splendor
I follow, learn
   and recite like Mūsā




                              Release    5
                               ‫ـاطـلَـةٌ‬ ‫ـات ٱل ـ ُّـر ِوم عـ ِ‬   ‫أُس ـ ُقـ َّـف ـةٌ ِم ــن ب ــنَـ ِ‬
                                            ‫َ‬                           ‫ْ َ‬                       ‫ْ‬
       ‫ـوســا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـام‬‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬ ‫ِ‬
                      ‫ر‬ ‫ا‬‫ـو‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬‫َ‬‫ٱل‬
                                         ‫ْ‬  ‫ـن‬‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                ‫م‬ ‫ـا‬   ‫ـ‬ ‫ـه‬‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                                                                 ‫َ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ع‬ ‫ى‬   ‫ـر‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ت‬
          ‫َ َ َ َْ َ ْ َ َ ُ َ‬



                            ‫ت‬ ‫ٱتَـ ـ َذ ْ‬‫و ْحـ ِـش ـيَّـةٌ مــا ِب ــا أُنْــس قَـ ِـد َّ‬
                                                         ‫َ َ ٌ‬                          ‫َ‬
       ‫وس ــا‬‫ـاو‬‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬ ‫ِ‬
                    ‫ر‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ك‬‫ْ‬ ‫ِّ‬
                            ‫ـذ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫ـ‬‫ل‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ت‬‫ِ‬ ‫ـو‬‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                                                   ‫ْ‬
                                            ‫َْ َ َ َ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫خ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                          ‫ـت‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـي‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬ ‫ف‬‫ِ‬
           ‫َ ُ َ‬



                                ‫ت ُكـ ـ َّـل َع ـ ـ َّـاٍم بِِ ـلَّــتِــنَــا‬                              ‫َع ـ ـ َ‬
                                                                                                  ‫ـج ـ ـ َـز ْ‬    ‫قَـ ـ ْد أ ْ‬
       ‫ـس ــا‬      ‫َو َد ُاو ِد يًّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا َو ِح ـ ـ ـ ـ ـب ـْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ًـرا ُثَّ قِ ـ ِّ‬
           ‫ـسـ ـي ـ َ‬



                                                            ‫ِِ‬
                                 ‫يل ْحت َسبـُنَا‬      ‫ْٱل ْن َ‬                  ‫ب‬‫َت تَطْلُ ُ‬        ‫إِ ْن أ َْو َمأ ْ‬
       ‫ـسـ ــا‬        ‫ِ‬                       ‫ِ‬
            ‫أ َْو بَ ـ ـطَـ ــا ري ـ ـ ًق ـ ــا َشـَ ــام ـ ـيـ ـ َ‬                     ‫أَقِـ ـ ـ َّ‬
                                                                                ‫ـس ـ ـ ـةً‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                                         ‫ـت لِـ ْل ـب ـَ ْ ِ‬
                       ‫ـن نـَـاق ـَت ـَ َـهــا‬                                    ‫ـاد يْـ ُ‬
                                                               ‫ـت إ ْذ َر َّح ـلَـ ْ‬    ‫نـَ َ‬
       ‫يسا‬‫ِ ِ‬                               ‫ي ٱ لْعِ ِ‬          ‫ِ‬
        ‫يس َل َْت ُد و بَا ٱ لْع َ‬                            ‫يَا َحاد َ‬



                                 ‫صـ ِْـري يـَـ ْـوَم ب ـَْـيــنِـ ِهـ ُـم‬ ‫َجــنَـ َ‬
                                                                        ‫ـاد َ‬        ‫َعـب ـَّْـيـ ُ‬
                                                                                 ‫ـت أ ْ‬
       ‫ـس ــا‬   ‫ِ‬                        ‫َّ ِ ِ ِ‬
                                ‫َعـ ـلَ ــى ٱلـ ـطـ ـري ــق َكـ ـ َـراديـ ـ ً‬
           ‫ـسـ ــا َك ـ َـرادي ـ َ‬


‫‪6‬‬
A bishop, she is,
   Byzantium’s child
bathed in the light
   of the Holy Ghost


Wild, lone,
   she takes a tomb
as her retreat
   to remember and pray


She has baffled
   all our sages
as well as psalmists,
   rabbis and priests


Were she to beckon
   toward the gospel
you’d see us as vicars,
   deacons or priests


Driver, I cried,                    [10]
   as she saddled to leave,
don’t carry her
   away in your train!


The day she left me
   I set loose squadrons
along the path,
   armies of patience


                              Release   7
                  ‫ت نـَْف ِسي تـََراقِيـََها‬‫ت إِ ْذ بـَلَغَ ْ‬
                                                            ‫َسأَلْ ُ‬
        ‫ِ‬
    ‫يسا‬       ‫اك ٱللُّطْ َ‬
     ‫ف تـَْنف َ‬                    ‫ٱلَ َم َ‬
                           ‫ال َو َذ َ‬      ‫اك ْ‬ ‫َذ َ‬



                        ‫ـت َوَوقَ ــانَ ــا ٱل ـلَّــهُ ِش ـ َّـرت ـَ َـه ــا‬              ‫فَ ـأ ْ‬
                                                                              ‫َس ـلَـ َـم ـ ْ‬
    ‫ـســا‬   ‫ِ‬    ‫ِ‬                               ‫ِ‬
                   ‫ـصـ ُ‬
       ‫ـور إبْــلـيـ َ‬ ‫ـك ٱلْـ َـمـْنـ ُ‬     ‫َوَز ْحـ ـ َـز َح ٱلْـ َـمــلـ ُ‬




‫‪8‬‬
With soul in throat
  slipping away
I implored that gracious
  beauty for release


She yielded   God
  spared us her fury
May salvation’s angel
  steal Iblīs away




                           Release   9
                                                                                                              ‫‪3‬‬




                                                 ‫ـوج ــا بِــٱلْ ـ َك ــثِ ـي ـ ِ‬
                           ‫ـب َو َعـ ـ ِّـر َجـ ــا‬                                                ‫ِ‬
                                                                              ‫َخ ــل ـي ـلَ ـ َّـي عُ ـ َ‬
      ‫ـاه يـَـلَـ ْـم ـلَ ـ ِم‬         ‫ع ـلَــى لَــع ـلَ ـ ٍع وٱطْـ ـلُ ـ ِ‬
                           ‫ـب م ــيَ ـ َ‬       ‫ْ‬         ‫ْ َ‬                      ‫َ‬



                                                   ‫ِ‬                            ‫ِ‬
                                         ‫فَـ ـ ـِإ َّن بَــا َم ـ ْـن قَـ ـ ْد َع ــل ـ ْـم ـ َ‬
                  ‫ـت َوَم ـ ـ ْـن َل ـُ ْـم‬
      ‫ٱعتِ َما ِري َو َم ْوِِسي‬     ‫ِصيَ ِامي َو َح ِّجي َو ْ‬



                        ‫ـى‬  ‫فَـ َـا أَنْــس ي ــومــا بِــٱلْــمــحـ َّ ِ ِ ِ‬
                        ‫ـصــب مـ ْـن مـ ً‬          ‫َ َْ ً ُ َ‬
      ‫َع ـلَــى أُمـ ـ ُـوًرا َوَزْم ـ َـزِم ــي‬
                                              ‫ـح ـ ِر ْ‬
                                               ‫ٱل‬‫ْ‬    ‫َوبِــٱلْـ َـم ـْنـ َ‬



                  ‫ـص ـ ـب ـُ ـ ُـهـ ـ ْـم قـَـ ـ ْل ـ ـ ِـي لِـ ـ ـ َـرْم ـ ـ ـ ِي ِجَـ ـ ــا ِرِهـ ـ ـ ْـم‬
                                                                                                         ‫ُمَـ ـ َّ‬
         ‫ِ‬                                    ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـحـ ُـرُهـ ْـم ن ـَ ْفــســي َوَم ـ ْشـ َـرب ـُ ُـهـ ْـم َدمــي‬      ‫َوَمـْنـ َ‬



                          ‫ال إِ ْن ِجْئت ح ِ‬
                       ‫اجًرا‬                              ‫َجَ ِ‬‫ي ْٱل ْ‬      ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                           ‫َ َ‬                                         ‫فـَيَا َحاد َ‬
                                                                    ‫ِ‬
                             ‫ـف بِــٱ لْ ـ َـم ـطَــايَــا َس ـ َ‬
      ‫ـاعـ ـةً ُثَّ َس ـلِّ ـ ِم‬                                ‫فَ ــق ـ ْ‬




‫‪10‬‬
The Offering




Turn at al-­Kathīb,
   friends, then pass
by Láʿlaʿi, in search
   of Yalámlam’s waters


There you’ll find
   those you’d known
My hajj is for them,
   my fast and feast


I’ll never forget
   Muhássab near Mína,
the field of sacrifice,
   or Zámzam’s spring


As if they cast
   live coals from my heart,
offered my soul,
   drank my blood!


When you come to Hājir,                       [5]
   driver, halt
the camels there,
   shout forth a greeting




                               The Offering   11
                              ‫ٱلِ َمى‬   ‫ب ْ‬            ‫ٱلُ ْمر ِم ْن َجانِ ِ‬                             ‫ِ ِ‬
                                                                                  ‫اب ْ َ‬            ‫َونَاد ٱ لْقبَ َ‬
                                                           ‫َِت ـ ـ ـيَّـ ـ ـةَ م ـ ـ ـ ْشـ ـ ــتَـ ـ ـ ٍ‬
       ‫ـاق إِلَ ـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ـ ُك ـ ـ ْـم ُم ـ ـتـَـ ـيَّ ـ ـ ِم‬                     ‫ُ‬



                             ‫ـصــبَــا‬              ‫ـسـ َ‬
                                    ‫ـام َم ـ َـع ٱلـ َّ‬    ‫ـٱهـ ِـد ٱلـ َّ‬   ‫فَ ـِإ ْن َسـلَّـ ُـمـوا فَـ ْ‬
       ‫ـٱر َح ـ ـ ْـل ِبَـ ــا َوتـَـ ـ َق ـ ـ َّـدِم‬
                                                   ‫َوإِ ْن َسـ ـ َك ــتُـ ـوا فَـ ـ ْ‬



                      ‫ـت ِرَكــا ب ـُ ُـهـ ْـم‬                            ‫ِ ِ‬          ‫ِ‬
                                             ‫ـث َحـلَّـ ْ‬
                                                        ‫يسى َحـْـيـ ُ‬‫إ َل ن ـَ ْـهـر ع َ‬
                  ‫يض ِم ْن َجانِ ِ‬
       ‫ب ٱ لْ َف ِم‬                         ‫ام ٱ لْبِ ُ‬
                                                           ‫ث ِْ‬
                                                       ‫ٱليَ ُ‬     ‫َو َحْي ُ‬



                              ‫ـاب وَزي ـْ ـ ــنَـ ـ ـ ٍ‬
                              ‫ـب‬                     ‫ِ‬                         ‫ٍ‬                ‫ِِ‬
                                                  ‫َونَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــاد ب ـ ـ َـد ْع ـ ــد َوٱل ـ ـ ـ ـ َّـربَـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
       ‫َو ِه ـ ـْن ـ ـ ٍـد َولُـ ـ ـبـْـ ـ َـى ُثَّ َسـ ـ ْل ـ َـم ــى َوَزْم ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـزِم‬



                            ‫ـادةُ ٱلَّ ـ ِـي‬                   ‫وسـ ـ ْل ــه ـ َّـن هـ ــل بِ ـ ْ ِ‬
‫]‪[10‬‬                                      ‫ـٱلَـ ـ ْل ــبَ ــة ٱلْ ـ ــغَ ـ ـ َ‬  ‫ََ ُ َ ْ‬
       ‫ـس ـ ِم‬                        ‫ِ‬  ‫ِ‬
               ‫ـ‬‫ـب‬‫ـ‬‫ت‬
                   ‫َّ‬
            ‫ْ َ َ ُّ‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـد‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ع‬  ‫ـاء‬‫ـ‬ ‫تـُ ـ ِري ـ َ َ َ َ ْ َ‬
                                              ‫ـض‬    ‫ـ‬ ‫ـي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                                                               ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـن‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫س‬ ‫ـك‬




‫‪12‬‬
And call toward the red
   pavilions of Híma,
call out a greeting
   of longing and loss


If you hear back
   bear them blessings
and fond regards
   If not, journey on


To the river of ʿĪsā
   where their camels graze
and white tents nestle
   by the stream


Ring forth the names
   of Daʿd and Rabáb,
Záynab and Hind,
   Lúbna then Sálma


Then ask if there’s                          [10]
   a girl at Hálba
who shows the sun
   in her smile




                              The Offering    13
                                                                                                                 ‫‪4‬‬




                            ‫ٱلِ َمى‬
                                  ‫َسـ َـا ٌم َعلَى َس ْل َمى َو َمـ ْـن َح َّل بِ ْ‬
      ‫ـسـ ـلِّ ـ َـم ــا‬                        ‫ِِ ِ ِ‬
                      ‫َو ُحـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َّـق ل ــمـ ـثْ ــل ــي رقَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـةً أَ ْن يُـ َ‬



              ‫َو َم ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا َذ ا َعـ ـ ـلَـ ـ ـيـْـ ـ َـه ـ ــا أَ ْن ت ـَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُـرَّد َِت ـ ـيَّ ـ ـةً‬
          ‫ام َعلَى ُّ‬
      ‫ٱلد َمى‬                     ‫علَيـنَا وٰل ِكن َل ِ‬
                           ‫ٱحت َك َ‬  ‫ْ‬                    ‫َْ َ ْ‬



                              ‫َس ـ ـ َـرْوا َوظَـ ـ ـ َـا ُم ٱل ـلَّـ ْـي ـ ِـل أ َْر َخ ـ ــى ُس ـ ُـدولَــهُ‬
      ‫ص ـ ـبَّـ ــا َغ ـ ـ ِريـ ــبًـ ــا ُمـ ـت ـَـيَّ ـ َـم ــا‬          ‫فـَـ ـ ُق ـ ـ ْلـ ـ ُ‬
                                                                ‫ـت َلَـ ــا َ‬



                           ‫ت‬  ‫اق َش ْوقًا َوأ ُْر ِص َد ْ‬              ‫َش َو ُ‬    ‫ت بِِه ْٱل َ‬         ‫أَ‬
                                                                                                 ‫َحا طَ ْ‬
      ‫ـات ٱل ـ ـنَّـ ـ ْـبـ ـ ِـل أَيـَّ ـ ـ ـ ــا َن َيَّـ َـم ــا‬               ‫ِ‬
                                                                ‫لَ ـ ــهُ َراشـ ـ ـ ـ َق ـ ـ ـ ُ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                       ‫ـض بَ ـ ــا ِر ٌق‬                        ‫ت ثـَــنَ ــايَ ـ َ‬
                                         ‫ـاه ــا َوأ َْوَم ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬               ‫فَـ ـ ـأَبْـ ـ ـ َـد ْ‬
                       ‫ِ‬
      ‫س مـن ـْ ُـهـ َـمــا‬   ‫ِ‬          ‫فـلَـ ْـم أ َْد ِر َمـ ْـن َشـ َّـق ْ‬
                         ‫ٱلَــنَــاد َ‬




‫‪14‬‬
As Night Let Down Its Curtain




Peace, Sálma
   and peace to those
who halt at al-­Híma
   It’s right I greet you


Would it have hurt
   to return the greeting?
A lady of stone
   never responds


They left as night
   let down its curtain
Pity a lad, I said,
   dazed and forsaken


Hemmed in by longings,
   pierced by their arrows
on target always
   wherever he goes


She smiled, lightning                                           [5]
   flashed, and I couldn’t
tell what it was
   that split the night




                                As Night Let Down Its Curtain   15
                                                    ‫ـت أ ََمـ ـ ـ ــا يـَ ـ ْك ـ ِـفـ ـي ـ ِـه أ ِّ‬
                          ‫َن بِـ ـ َقـ ـ ْلـ ـبِ ـ ِـه‬                                           ‫َوقَ ـ ــا لَ ـ ـ ْ‬
                               ‫ٍ‬
     ‫ـش ــاه ـ ُـدِن ِف ُكـ ـ ِّـل َوقْ ـ ــت أ ََم ـ ــا أ ََم ــا‬              ‫ِ‬
                                                                                        ‫يُـ َ‬




‫‪16‬‬
Each moment he
   beholds me anew
in his heart, she said
   What more can he ask?




                           As Night Let Down Its Curtain   17
                                                                                                        ‫‪5‬‬




                                         ‫ـش ـ ْـو ُق َوأَتـْـ َـه ـ َـم ٱلْـ َـعـ َـزا‬  ‫أ َْنَ ـ َـد ٱل ـ َّ‬
                    ‫ِ‬   ‫ٍ‬
      ‫ـام‬                               ‫فَـ ـ ـأَنـَ ـ ــا َمـ ـ ــا بـَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْ َ‬
      ‫ـن َْن ـ ـ ـ ـ ــد َوتَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْ‬



                                    ‫َّان لَـ ـ ْـن َْي ــتَـ ِـم ـ َـع ــا‬   ‫و ُه ـ ــا ِضـ ـ ــد ِ‬
                                                                                               ‫ََ‬
      ‫ـام‬‫ـ‬ ‫ظ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
              ‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬ ‫ـر‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫َّه‬
                         ‫ـد‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـه‬  ‫ـ‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ل‬   ‫ـا‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫م‬    ‫ِ‬
                                                            ‫ـات‬    ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـت‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـش‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ف‬
      ‫َ ََ َ َ ُ ْ َ َ ْ‬



                                             ‫ٱحتِيَ ِال ُد لَِّن‬
                                                              ‫صنيعي َما ْ‬
                                                                               ‫ما ِ ِ‬
                                                                                  ‫َ َ‬
      ‫يَ ــا َع ـ ـ ـ ُذ ِول َل تـَـ ـ ُـر ْع ـ ـ ِـي بِ ــٱ لْ ـ َـم ـ َـا ْم‬




                                        ‫ـت ُ‬
                              ‫صــعُـ ًـدا‬                                 ‫َزفـَـ ـ َـر ٌ‬
                                                 ‫ات قَ ـ ْد ت ـَ َـعــالَـ ْ‬
      ‫ـام‬     ‫ِ‬
          ‫َّي س ـ َ‬
      ‫ـج ـ ْ‬    ‫َو ُد ُم ـ ـ ـ ــوعٌ ف ـَـ ـ ـ ـ ْـو َق َخـ ـ ـ ــد َّ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                          ‫ـت ٱ لْــعِـيــس إِ َل أَوطَـ ِ‬
                         ‫ـانَــا‬                          ‫ح ـنَّـ ِ‬
                                  ‫ْ‬          ‫ُ‬                    ‫َ‬
      ‫ام‬ ‫ه‬ ‫ـ‬‫ت‬ ‫س‬‫م‬‫ل‬
                ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ني‬‫ٱلس ِي حنِ‬     ‫ى‬ ‫ج‬   ‫و‬   ‫ن‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                 ‫م‬
      ‫َّ ْ َ َ ُ ْ ََ ْ‬                 ‫ْ ََ‬




‫‪18‬‬
Harmony Gone




Yearning sought the highlands,
  consolation the plain
and here I’m stranded
  between Najd and Tihām


Opposites never
  to be joined—
Undone, unstrung
  Harmony gone


Where is my craft?
  What can I do?
Guide me, scold—don’t
  crush me with blame


Sighs ascend
  to the highest heavens,
tears streaming
  from my eyes


The red-­roans yearned                          [5]
  for the meadows of home,
on cracked hooves racing
  like a crazed lover




                                 Harmony Gone   19
                                    ‫َمــا َحــيَـ ِـات ب ـَ ْـعـ َـد ُهـ ْـم إِ َّل ٱ لْ َفنَا‬
              ‫ـص ـ ِْـر ٱل ـ َّ‬
     ‫ـس ـ َـا ْم‬             ‫فَـ َـع ـلَ ـيْـ َـه ــا َو َعـ ـلَ ــى ٱل ـ َّ‬




‫‪20‬‬
I live on and
   in living die
Farewell to her, then,
   and to patience, farewell




                               Harmony Gone   21
                                                                                      ‫‪6‬‬




                  ‫ـصـب ـْ ُـر إِ ْذ بـَـانـُوا‬
                                            ‫بَــا َن ٱلْـ َـعـ َـزاءُ َوبَــا َن ٱلـ َّ‬
     ‫ب ُس َّكا ُن‬            ‫ِ‬
                ‫بَا نُوا و ُهم ِف َسواد ٱ لْ َق ْل ِ‬
                                 ‫َ‬               ‫َ ْ‬



                             ‫ِ ِ‬           ‫ِ‬
                    ‫يل لَنَا‬      ‫َسأَلْتـُُه ْم َع ْن َمق ِيل َّ‬
                          ‫ٱلرْكب ق َ‬
     ‫ِّيح َوٱ لْبَا ُن‬                           ‫ِ‬
                  ‫اح ٱلش ُ‬  ‫ث فَ َ‬
                                 ‫َمقيلُ ُه ْم َحْي ُ‬



                     ‫ٱلَـ ِـقــي بِِـ ِم‬‫ـت لِـلـِّـريـ ِـح ِس ـ ِري َو ْ‬    ‫ف ـَ ُقـ ْلـ ُ‬
                  ‫ِ‬                    ‫ِ‬           ‫ِ‬
     ‫فَـ ـِإنـَّـ ُـه ـ ْـم ع ـْن ـ َـد ظ ـ ِّـل ْٱلَيْـ ـ ــك قُـطَّــا ُن‬



                    ‫َخــي َش َج ٍن‬   ‫وب ـلِّــغِـيـ ِهــم سـ َـا مــا ِمــن أ ِ‬
                                         ‫ََ ْ َ ً ْ‬
     ‫ـجــا ُن‬‫ـ‬‫ش‬‫َ‬‫أ‬ ‫ِ‬
                  ‫ـوم‬ ‫ـ‬‫ق‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ِ‬
                               ‫اق‬‫ـر‬  ‫ِ‬     ‫ِ ِِ ِ‬
           ‫َ ْ َ‬           ‫ْ‬       ‫ـ‬ ‫ف‬  ‫ـن‬
                                  ‫ف ق ـَْلـبــه مـ ْ َ‬




‫‪22‬‬
Artemisia and Moringa




Patience and solace are gone—
   gone with those
who live within
   my heart’s dark core


I asked where they’d kneel
   their camels at noon
By the artemisia,
   I heard, and moringa


I asked the wind
   to track them to
the thicket’s shade
   where their tent wings spread


To bring them greetings
   from the slave of grief
His heart was torn
   when the tribe dispersed




                                   Artemisia and Moringa   23
                                                                                     ‫‪7‬‬




                    ‫ـس‬       ‫ِ‬            ‫اح ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـي ِعـ ـْن ـ َـد ِ ِ‬
                     ‫ٱسـ ــتـ ـ َـامـ ــي أ ََوان ـ ـ ـ ٌ‬
                                                       ‫ْ‬                 ‫َوَز ََ‬
      ‫اف م ــع ــت ـ ِـج ــراتِ‬‫أَت ـ ـ ــن إِ َل ٱ لـ ـتَّـ ـطْ ــو ِ‬
         ‫َ ُ َْ َ‬                                         ‫َ َْ‬



              ‫لن ِل‬       ‫ُّم ِ‬         ‫ِ‬
                 ‫وس َوقُ َ‬      ‫َح َس ْر َن َع َن ٱ ن ـْ َـوا ر ٱلش ُ‬
      ‫س ِف ٱللَّحظَ ِ‬
      ‫ات‬              ‫ت ٱلنـَّْف ِ‬
          ‫َ‬                            ‫ت ـََـوَّر ْع َ‬
                                  ‫فم ْو ُ‬



                  ‫ىن‬ ‫فَ َكم قَـ ْد ق ـت ـ ْلــنَــا بِٱ لْمح َّ ِ ِ ِ‬
                  ‫صب مـ ْـن م ً‬        ‫َُ‬                  ‫ََ‬    ‫ْ‬
      ‫ٱلـ ــمـ ــر ِ‬
      ‫ات‬          ‫ْ‬   ‫ى‬  ‫ـد‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٍ‬
                                  ‫ـات‬‫ـ‬
                          ‫ُ ُ ً َّ َ َ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                              ‫ب‬‫َ‬‫أ‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫س‬‫ـو‬‫ـ‬ ‫ف‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ن‬
         ‫َََ‬



                ‫َعـ ـ ـ ـ َـاِم َر َامـ ـ ٍـة‬          ‫ِ‬
                                           ‫َوِف َس ـ ْـر َح ـ ِـة ٱ لْـ ـ ـ َـواد ي َوأ ْ‬
      ‫و َج ـ ـ ٍع و ِعـ ـْن ـ َـد ٱل ـنـَّـ ْف ـ ِر ِم ــن ع ــرفَـ ِ‬
      ‫ـات‬  ‫ْ ََ‬                                         ‫َ ْ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬
                                 ‫ٱلُـ ْـسـ َـن يَـ ْـسـلُـ ُ‬
                 ‫ـب َم ـ ْـن لَــهُ‬                       ‫َن ْ‬ ‫أَ َلْ تَــد ِر أ َّ‬
      ‫ٱلــســنَـ ِ‬
      ‫ـات‬                      ‫ِ‬
             ‫ـب َْ َ‬    ‫ـاف ف ـَـيُـ ْد َعــى َســالـ َ‬ ‫َعـ َفـ ٌ‬




‫‪24‬‬
Gowns of Dark




I touched the stone
      through a whirl of young women
circling the Káʿba,
      faces veiled


They lowered their veils,
      revealing the sun
Death stalks the
      gaze, they warned


Many’s the proud
      soul we’ve taken
questing at the threshold
      of Mína’s cairns


In the wádi courts,
      near the heights of Râm
and Jem, through the throngs
      on ʿÁrafa plain


See how beauty                                         [5]
      plunders the chaste
“Spoiler of virtue”—
      so aptly named




                                       Gowns of Dark   25
              ‫اف بِ ـ َـزْم ـ َـزٍم‬
                                  ‫فَ ــم ــو ِع ـ ُـدنَــا بـ ــع ـ َـد ٱل ـ ـطَّـ ــو ِ‬
                                     ‫َ‬                   ‫َْ‬                   ‫َْ‬
     ‫ٱلصخر ِ‬
     ‫ات‬    ‫َّ‬ ‫ى‬  ‫د‬    ‫َ‬‫ل‬    ‫ى‬   ‫ط‬
                                ‫َ‬  ‫س‬‫و‬ ‫ل‬
                                      ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬   ‫ِ‬
                                            ‫ة‬   ‫ب‬
                                                ‫َّ‬ ‫ق‬‫ْ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ى‬    ‫د‬  ‫ل‬
                                                                 ‫َ‬
        ‫ََ‬         ‫َ‬               ‫ُ ُْ‬                        ‫َ‬



                          ‫ك َم ْن قَ ْد َشفَّهُ ٱ لْ َو ْج ُد يَ ْشتَ ِفي‬             ‫ِ‬
                                                                                    ‫ُهنَال َ‬
     ‫ِبـَـ ـ ــا َش ـ ــاقَ ـ ــه ِمـ ـ ـ ــن نِـ ـ ــس ـ ـ ــوٍة ع ـ ـ ِـط ـ ــر ِ‬
     ‫ات‬ ‫ُ ْ ْ َ َ َ‬



                           ‫ور فـَُه َّن ِم ْن‬ ‫َس َد لْ َن ٱلشُّعُ َ‬
                                                                                  ‫ِ‬
                                                                        ‫إِ َذ ا خ ْف َن أ ْ‬
     ‫ـف ٱ لـ ـظُّـ ـلُ ــم ـ ِ‬‫َل ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِ‬                    ‫ِ‬
     ‫ـات‬ ‫َ‬                               ‫َغ ـ ـ َـد ائـ ـ ـ ِرَه ـ ــا ِف أ ُْ‬




‫‪26‬‬
We’ll meet at Zámzam
      after the circling,
by the middle tent,
      near the boulders


There a man starved
      by love’s fever
is cured by the scent
      of those who lured him


Roused, they loosen
      their hair and let it
fall, enfolding them-­
      selves in dark




                               Gowns of Dark   27
                                                                                           ‫‪8‬‬




                           ‫اه ـ ُـم‬         ‫ـت ُربُــوعُ ـ ُـه ـ ُـم َوأ َّ‬
                                 ‫َن َه ـ َـو ُ‬                           ‫َد َر َسـ ـ ـ ْ‬
      ‫س‬                                           ‫ِ‬
                                    ‫أَبَـ ـ ًـدا َج ــدي ـ ٌد بِـ ْ‬
                               ‫ـٱلَـ َ‬
      ‫ـش ــا َم ــا يَـ ـ ْد ُر ُ‬



                         ‫ٰه ـ ِـذي طُـلُــو ُلـُ ُـم َو ٰهـ ـ ِـذي ْٱل َْد ُمـ ـ ُـع‬
                                                             ‫ِِ‬
      ‫ـس‬                ‫َول ــذ ْك ـ ِره ــا أَبَـ ـ ًـدا تَـ ـ ُذ ُ‬
      ‫وب ْٱلَن ـْ ـ ُف ـ ُ‬



                      ‫ف ِرَكابِِ ْم ِم ْن ُحبِّ ِه ْم‬       ‫اد يْ ُ‬
                                                    ‫ت َخ ْل َ‬    ‫نَ َ‬
        ‫ِ‬                                     ‫ِ‬
      ‫ٱلُ ْس ُن َها أَنَا ُم ْفل ُ‬
      ‫س‬                            ‫يَا َم ْن غنَاهُ ْ‬



                                             ‫ـت َخ ـ ــدِّي ِرقَّـ ـ ـ ـةً َو َ‬
                             ‫ص ــبَ ــابَـ ـةً‬                               ‫َمـ ـ َّـر ْغـ ـ ُ‬
                                                                  ‫فَـبِـ َ‬
      ‫ـحـ ِّـق َح ـ ِّـق َه ـ َـوا ُك ـ ُـم َل ت ـُ ْـويِ ـس ـ ُـوا‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                           ‫َم ـ ْـن ظَ ـ َّـل ِف َعـ ـبـَـ َـراتِـ ِـه َغ ـ ِرقًــا َوِف‬
      ‫ـس‬                              ‫ِ‬
      ‫َسـ ــى َح ـرقًــا َوَل ُم ـتـَـن ـَ َّـف ـ ُ‬   ‫نَ ــا ِر ْٱل َ‬




‫‪28‬‬
Who Forever




Their spring meadows
   are desolate now
but desire for them
   lives on in the heart


      These are their ruins
         tears in memory
      of those who melt
         the soul forever


I called out, following,
   love-­dazed, after
You so full with
   beauty—I’ve nothing


      With desire maddened,
         I rubbed my face
      in the dust   By the
         right of true love


Don’t crush a man                           [5]
   drowned in tears
yet aflame
   with ceaseless sorrow




                              Who Forever   29
                               ‫يَــا ُم ــوقِ ـ َـد ٱلـ ـنَّ ــا ِر ٱلـ ـ ُّـرَويْـ ـ َـدا ٰهـ ـ ِـذ ِه‬
     ‫ـصــبَــابـَ ِـة َش ـأْنَـ ُكـ ْـم ف ـَْلـت ـَ ْقـبِـسـ ُـوا‬‫ـار ٱلـ َّ‬ ‫نَـ ُ‬




‫‪30‬‬
Put down your flint,
   fire-­striker
Here is passion’s fire­
   Take an ember




                          Who Forever   31
                                                                                      ‫‪9‬‬




                            ‫ـت لَ ــنَ ــا بِ ـ ـ ْـٱلَبـْـ ــرقـَـ ـ ْ ِ‬
             ‫ـن ب ـُ ـ ـ ُـر ُ‬
             ‫وق‬                                                        ‫لَ ـ َـم ـ َـع ـ ْ‬
                                      ‫َ‬
      ‫وع ُرعُ ُ‬
      ‫ود‬          ‫ـن ُّ‬
             ‫ٱلضلُ ِ‬          ‫ت َلَا ب ـَ ْ َ‬   ‫ص َف ْ‬     ‫قَ َ‬



                    ‫خ ـي ـلَـ ٍـة‬   ‫و َهـ ـ ــت س ــح ــائِ ـبـ ــه ــا بِـ ـ ُك ـ ِّـل َِ‬
                                                              ‫َ َ ْ َ َ َُ‬
      ‫ـك َيِـ ـي ـ ُـد‬                         ‫ٍ‬
                    ‫َوبِ ـ ـ ُك ـ ـ ِّـل َ َّ َ َ ْ َ‬
                             ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـي‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ع‬ ‫ـاد‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫م‬



              ‫ـاح نَـ ِـسـيـ ُـمـ َـهــا‬                    ‫ِ‬
                                                                       ‫ـج ـ َـر ْ‬
                                     ‫ت َم ـ َذان ـب ـُ َـه ــا َوفَـ ـ َ‬       ‫فَـ َ‬
      ‫ـت ُم ـطَـ َّـوقَ ـةٌ َوأ َْوَر َق عُ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـود‬                                       ‫َو َهـ ـ َف ـ ْ‬



                ‫ـن َج َد ا ِو ٍل‬                                    ‫ِ‬
                                                       ‫اب ْ‬
                                        ‫ٱلُ ْمَر ب ـَ ْ َ‬               ‫نَ َ‬
                                                          ‫صبُوا ٱ لْقبَ َ‬
                                         ‫ِ‬                        ‫ِ‬
      ‫َس ـ ــا ِود بـَـيـْـن ـَ ُـه ـ َّـن ق ـُـعُـ ُ‬
      ‫ـود‬                                          ‫م ـثْـ ِـل ْٱل َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬               ‫ـوس طَـ َـوالِـ ٌـع‬  ‫ـشـ ُـمـ ِ‬
                                               ‫ـس َكــٱلـ ُّ‬     ‫ِ‬
                                                                         ‫بِـيـ ٌ‬
                                                           ‫ـض أ ََوان ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـات َعـ ـ َق ــائِ ـ ُـل ِغ ـي ـ ُـد‬
                                        ‫ـن َك ـ ـ ِرميَـ ـ ٌ‬
                                                               ‫ِ‬
                                                          ‫عـ ـ ٌ‬




‫‪32‬‬
Soft-­Eyed Graces




Lightning flashed
      in Abraqáyn
Thunder roared
      within our ribs


A fine rain fell
      on sand-­slipped hills,
quivering branches
      bending toward you


Streams gushing,
      soft winds fragrant,
doves in the boughs,
      tender new sprigs


They pitched their red
      tents between rivers
winding like snakes—
      and there they stood


Splendid as rising                                  [5]
      suns, they were
Soft-­eyed graces
      Beyond compare




                                Soft-­Eyed Graces   33
                                                                             ‫‪10‬‬




                     ‫اسنِ ِه‬
                          ‫ب ِمن َم ِ‬               ‫قَا لَت ع ِجب ِ‬
                               ‫ص ٍّ ْ َ‬           ‫تلَ‬   ‫ْ َ ُْ‬
     ‫ـال م ــا ب ـ ــن أ َْزه ـ ــا ٍر بِــبــســتَـ ِ‬
     ‫ـان‬    ‫َيْــتَ ُ َ َ ْ َ َ ُ ْ‬                   ‫ـ‬



                ‫ـجـِـي ِمـَّـا ت ـََـريْـ َـن ف ـَ َقـ ْد‬             ‫ف ـَ ُقـ ْلـ ُ‬
                                                       ‫ـت َل ت ـَ ْـعـ َ‬
              ‫ك ِف ِمر ِ‬
     ‫آة إِنْسانِ‬                   ‫ت نـ ْفس ِ‬      ‫أَبصر ِ‬
        ‫َ‬         ‫ْ‬                       ‫ْ َْ َ َ‬




‫‪34‬‬
Mirror




I wonder at a love
   that flaunts its glory
among the garden
   flowers, she said


Don’t, I said
   You’re seeing yourself
in the mirror
   of humankind




                            Mirror   35
                                                                                                    ‫‪11‬‬




                    ‫وٱ لْـ ــبـ ـ ِ‬
                    ‫ـان‬                                               ‫أ ََل ي ــا َحـ ــامـ ـ ِ‬
                                              ‫ـات ْٱل ََرا َكـ ـ ـ ـ ِـة‬
                         ‫َ َ‬                                                ‫َ َ َ‬
                      ‫بِ ْ‬
      ‫َّج ِو أَ ْش َج ِان‬
                        ‫ٱلش‬                   ‫ضعِ ْف َن‬    ‫تـََر َّْ َ َ ُ ْ‬
                                                                 ‫ت‬  ‫ل‬  ‫ن‬‫ق‬ ‫ـ‬‫ف‬



                         ‫تـَـ َـرفـَّـ ْق ـ َـن َل تُـظْ ـ ِه ـ ْـر َن بِــٱل ـن ـَّ ْـو ِح َوٱلْــبُـ َكــا‬
      ‫َحـ ـ ـ َـز ِان‬                                                          ‫ِ‬
                   ‫ص ــبَ ــابَـ ِـات َوَمـ ـ ْك ــنُ ــو َن أ ْ‬
                                                               ‫َخ ــف ـ َّـي َ‬



                      ‫ـحــى‬            ‫َص ـي ـ ِـل َوبــٱلـ ُّ‬   ‫أُطَــا ِرحــهــا ِع ـْنـ َـد ْٱل ِ‬
                            ‫ـضـ َ‬                                                               ‫َُ‬
                                                ‫ِبـ ـ ـ ـنَّـ ـ ـ ِـة م ـ ـ ـ ْشـ ـ ــتَـ ـ ـ ٍ‬
      ‫ـاق وأَنَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـة هـ ــيـ ــمـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـان‬  ‫ََْ‬                               ‫َ‬                          ‫ُ‬                    ‫َ‬



                              ‫ضى‬              ‫ـت ْٱلَرواح ِف َغي ِ‬                 ‫ت ــنَــاوحـ ِ‬
                                   ‫ضة ٱ لْغَ َ‬ ‫َْ‬                  ‫َْ ُ‬               ‫َ ََ‬
                                              ‫ـت بِـ ـأَف ـ ــنَـ ـ ٍ‬
      ‫ـان َعـ ـلَ ـ َّـي فَـ ـأَف ـْ ــنَـ ـ ِـان‬                    ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـم‬‫ـ‬ ‫ف‬
                                                        ‫ََ َ ْ ْ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                            ‫ت ِم َن ٱلش َّْو ِق ٱ لْ ُمبـَِّر ِح َو ْ‬
                           ‫ٱلََوى‬                                      ‫َوجاَءَ ْ‬
      ‫ل بِـ ـأَفـ ــنَ ــانِ‬                       ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
                ‫َوم ـ ـ ْـن طُـ ـ َـرف ٱ لْـ ـب ـَـ ْل ـ َـوى إِ ََّ ْ‬




‫‪36‬‬
Gentle Now, Doves




Gentle now, doves
   of the sprigberry and
moringa, don’t add your
   sighs to my heart-ache


Gentle now, lest
   your sad cooing show
the love I hide,
   the sorrow I seal


In the evening I echo
   back, in the morning
echo the longing
   of the lovesick and lost


Spirits moan
   in the Gháda trees
bending branches over me
   as I pass away


Bringing yearning,                                [5]
   heartbreak and ever
new twists of pain
   to try me




                              Gentle Now, Doves   37
                 ‫ـى‬ ‫فَــمــن ِل ِبــمـ ٍع وٱلْــمــحـ َّ ِ ِ ِ‬
                 ‫ـصــب مـ ْـن مـ ً‬ ‫َ ْ َْ َ ُ َ‬
                                 ‫ومن ِل بِ َذ ِ‬
       ‫ات ْٱلَثْ ِل من ِل بِنـعم ِ‬
       ‫ان‬ ‫َْ َ‬      ‫َْ‬                      ‫ََ ْ‬



                             ‫ـاع ـ ٍـة‬
                                   ‫ـاعـ ـةً بـَـ ْـع ـ َـد َس ـ َ‬        ‫ـوف بِ ـ َق ـ ْل ـ ِـي َس ـ َ‬
                                                                                                    ‫تَـ ـطُـ ُ‬
                                     ‫ِ‬                                           ‫ٍ‬               ‫ِ‬
       ‫ل ـ ـ َـو ْج ـ ــد َوتـَـ ـ ـ ْـري ـ ـ ـ ٍـح َوتـَـ ـ ْل ـ ــث ـ ـ ُـم أ َْرَكـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـان‬



                         ‫ـت‬        ‫ـول َوأَقـ َ‬
                          ‫ـسـ َـمـ ْ‬        ‫ت أَ ْن َل َتُـ َ‬  ‫َوَكـ ْـم َعـ ِهـ َـد ْ‬
       ‫ـوب وفَـ ـ ــاء بِـ ـأ َْيـَ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬                           ‫ـخ ـ ُ ٍ‬          ‫ولَـ ــيـ ـ ِ‬
                        ‫ـض ـ َ ٌ‬              ‫ـس ل ـ َـم ـ ْ‬
                                                          ‫َ ْ َ‬


                                                        ‫ِ‬
                           ‫ـي ُم ـب ـَ ْـرقَـ ٌـع‬                          ‫َع ـ َ ِ‬
                                               ‫ـج ــب ْٱلَ ْش ــيَ ــاء ظَـ ْ ٌ‬    ‫َوِم ـ ْـن أ ْ‬
       ‫ـوم ـ ــي بِـ ـأَج ـ ـ َفـ ـ ِ‬    ‫ـاب وي ـ ـ ِ‬ ‫ٍ‬            ‫ِ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬         ‫ْ‬                           ‫يـُ ــشـ ــرُ بـ ــعُ ـ ـنَّـ ـ َ ُ‬



                      ‫ـش ــى‬
                          ‫ٱلَـ َ‬   ‫ـن ٱل ـت ـَّـرائِـ ِ‬
                              ‫ـب َو ْ‬
‫]‪[10‬‬
                                         ‫َوَم ـ ْـر َع ــاهُ َم ــا ب ـَ ـ ْ َ َ‬
       ‫ضـ ـ ٍـة وسـ ـ َط نِــرانِ‬        ‫ِ‬
          ‫َ‬           ‫ـجــبًــا م ـ ْـن َرْو َ َ ْ‬  ‫َويَــا َعـ َ‬



                         ‫ـورٍة‬
                           ‫صـ ـ َ‬     ‫ـار ق ـَ ـ ْل ـ ِـي قَ ــابِـ ـاً ُكـ ـ َّـل ُ‬  ‫لَ ـ َق ـ ْد َ‬
                                                                                 ‫صـ ـ َ‬
       ‫فَ ــم ــرع ــى لِـ ـ ــغِـ ـ ــزَل ٍن وديـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــر لِ ــره ــب ــانِ‬
             ‫ْ َ َ ْ ٌ ُْ َ‬                                          ‫َ َْ‬


‫‪38‬‬
Who’s here for me
   in Jem and Muhássab,
at Tamarisk and
   camp Naʿmān?


Hour by hour they
   circle my heart
in rapture and graze
   each corner with a kiss


They swore they’d never
   change and vowed
Who dyes herself
   with henna’s unfaithful


A veiled gazelle’s
   an amazing sight,
her henna hinting,
   eyelids signaling


A pasture between                                [10]
   breastbone and spine
Marvel, a garden
   among the flames!


My heart can take on
   any form
For gazelles a meadow
   A cloister for monks


                             Gentle Now, Doves    39
                     ‫ـان وَكـ ـ ْـعـ ــب ـ ـةُ طَـ ــائـِ ـ ٍ‬
                    ‫ـف‬                                    ‫ٍ‬           ‫وبـ ـ ــي ـ ـ ِ‬
                                          ‫ـت ل َْوثَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َ َ‬  ‫ََ ْ ٌ‬
     ‫وأَلْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــواح ت ـ ـ ـ ــور ٍاة وم ــص ــح ــف قـ ـ ـ ــرآنِ‬
        ‫َ َ ُ َ َْ َ ُ ْ َ ُ ُ ْ‬



                            ‫ـت‬
                            ‫َن تـَـ َـو َّج ـ َـه ـ ْ‬‫ـب أ َّ‬           ‫أ َِد ي ـ ـ ُـن بِ ـ ِـد يـ ـ ِن ْ‬
                                                                ‫ٱلُـ ـ ِّ‬
     ‫َرَك ـ ــائِـ ــبُـ ــهُ فَـ ــٱلـ ـ ِّـديـ ـ ُـن ديِـ ـ ـ ِـي َوإِِيـَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـان‬



                        ‫ُخ ــتِ ـ َـه ــا‬    ‫ِ ٍ‬
                                       ‫ُسـ ـ ـ َـوةٌ ِف بِـ ـ ْشـ ـ ِر هـ ـْن ــد َوأ ْ‬
                                                                                     ‫لَــنَ ــا أ ْ‬
     ‫ـس ولَـ ـي ـ ـلَـ ــى ُثَّ م ـ ــي و َغـ ــيـ ـ َـا نِ‬
               ‫َ ٍّ َ ْ‬                               ‫َوقـَـ ـ ْـي ـ ـ ٍ َ ْ‬




‫‪40‬‬
A temple for idols,
   pilgrim’s Ka`ba,
tablets of Torah,
   scrolls of the Qur’ân


I profess the religion
   of love   Wherever
its camels turn, there
   lives my faith


Like Bishr and Hind,
   love-­mad Qays
and his lost Láyla
   Máyya and stricken Ghaylān




                                Gentle Now, Doves   41
                                                                                                                    ‫‪12‬‬




                   ‫ٱلِ َمى‬   ‫ٱلد ي ِر ِمن ح ِ‬          ‫ِِ‬
                        ‫اض ِر ْ‬  ‫بذ ي َسلَ ٍم َو َّ ْ ْ َ‬
          ‫ص َو ِر ُّ‬
      ‫ٱلد َمى‬      ‫س ِف ُ‬  ‫َّم َ‬    ‫ِظبَاءٌ تُِر َ‬
                              ‫يك ٱلش ْ‬



                                                                           ‫ـب أَفْـ ـ ـ َـا ًكـ ـ ــا َوأ ْ‬
                                  ‫َخ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُـد ُم بَـ ـي ـْ ـ َـع ـ ـةً‬                            ‫فَـ ـ ـأ َْرقُ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫س َرْوض ـ ـ ـاً بِ ــٱل ـ َّـربِـ ـيـ ـ ِع ُم ــنَـ ْـم ــنَـ َـم ــا‬                   ‫َوأ ْ‬
                                                                                 ‫َحـ ـ ـ ـ ُـر ُ‬



                                  ‫ـى بِــٱلْـ َف ـلَــى‬ ‫اع ـ ــي ٱل ـظَّـ ِْ‬‫ِ‬
                                                                        ‫ُسَّـ ــى َر َ‬               ‫فـَـ َـوقـْــتً ــا أ َ‬
      ‫ـجـ ـ َـمـ ــا‬                                ‫ِ‬                 ‫َوَوقـْـ ـ ـ ــتً ـ ـ ـ ــا أ َ‬
                  ‫ُسَّـ ـ ـ ـ ــى َراه ـ ـ ــبً ـ ـ ــا َوُمـ ــنَـ ـ ِّ‬



                                     ‫ـوب وقَـ ـ ـ ْد َك ـ ــا َن و ِ‬            ‫ت ـَ ـث ـَ ـلَّ ـ َ‬
                           ‫اح ـ ـ ًـدا‬  ‫َ‬                      ‫ـث َْمـ ــبُـ ـ ِ َ‬
                        ‫َكــمــا ص ـي ـَّـروا ْٱلُق ــنُــوم بِــٱلـ َّـذ ِ‬
      ‫ات أَق ـْـنُـ َـمــا‬             ‫ْ َ‬               ‫َ َ ُ‬



                     ‫ـاح ق ـَـ ـ ْـوِل َغ ـ َـزالَـ ـةً‬
                                                    ‫صـ ـ ِ‬                ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                                                      ‫فَ ـ َـا ت ـُـْن ــك ـ َـر ْن يَــا َ‬
      ‫ُّم ــى‬                                      ‫ِ ِِ ٍ‬
          ‫تُــض ـ ُـئ ل ــغ ـ ْـزَلن يَـطُـ ْف ـ َـن َع ـلَــى ٱل ــد َ‬




‫‪42‬‬
Sunblaze




At Sálam and Híma’s
   cloister, gazelles
reveal the sun
   as marble statues


I observe the spheres,
   serve a basilica,
guard a garden
   jeweled with spring


Gazelle-­minder
   of the empty quarter,
astrologer, monk—
   is what they call me


The one I love is
   three though one
like the three they call
   a single being


Believe what I tell you,               [5]
   friend, about Sunblaze
guiding gazelles
   circling the statues




                            Sunblaze   43
                         ‫ـس أ َْو ُج ـ ًـه ــا‬         ‫ـادا َولِـل ـ َّ‬
                                             ‫ـش ـ ْـم ـ ِ‬           ‫َج ــيَ ـ ً‬  ‫فــلِ ـل ـظَّـ ِْ‬
                                                                             ‫ـي أ ْ‬
     ‫ـصـ َـمــا‬      ‫ِ‬                      ‫ولِـلــدُّمــيـ ِـة ٱلْ ـب ــيـ ِ‬
             ‫ص ـ ـ ْد ًرا َومـ ْـعـ َ‬‫ـضــاء َ‬ ‫َ ْ َ َْ َ‬



                          ‫ـس ــا‬    ‫َع ــرنَ ــا لِـ ْل ــغُـ ُ ِ ِ‬
                              ‫ـص ــون َم ـ َـاب ـ ً‬                 ‫َك ـ َـم ــا قَـ ـ ْد أ َ ْ‬
             ‫ِ‬          ‫ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
     ‫َخ ـ َـاقً ــا َولـ ـلـ ـبـَـ ْـرق َمـ ْـبــسـ َـمــا‬ ‫َولِـ ـلـ ـ َّـرْو ِ‬
                                                        ‫ضأْ‬




‫‪44‬‬
A gazelle with a neck
  a sun with a face
a blood-­marbled statue
  with wrist and breast


As we lend raiment
  to branches, virtues
to a garden and
  to lightning—a smile




                          Sunblaze   45
                                                                                 ‫‪13‬‬




                    ‫ـحـ ـ َّـن َحـ ـ ِزي ـ ُـن‬                              ‫ـاحـ ـ ْ‬
                                            ‫ـت ُم ـ ـطَـ ـ َّـوقَـ ـةٌ فَـ ـ َ‬   ‫نـَ ـ َ‬
      ‫ـن‬  ‫ِ‬                               ‫ِ‬
                                                             ‫َو َش ـ ـ َ‬
      ‫ـج ـ ــاهُ ت ـَـ ْـرج ـ ـيـ ـ ٌـع َل ـَ ــا َو َح ــن ـ ُ‬



                                              ‫ٱلد موع ِمن ٱ لْعي ِ‬                    ‫ِ‬
                       ‫ون تـََف ُّج ًعا‬            ‫َجَرت ُّ ُ ُ َ ُُ‬
      ‫ِلَ ــنِـ ـي ــنِ ـ َـه ــا فَ ـ ـ َك ـ ـأَنَّـ ـ ُـه ـ ـ َّـن عُـ ــيُـ ــو ُن‬



                  ‫ـار ْح ـت ـُ َـهــا ثَـ ْكـلَــى بِـ َفـ ْقـ ِـد َو ِحـيـ ِـد َهــا‬
                                                                                  ‫طَـ َ‬
                ‫ِ‬     ‫ِ‬           ‫ِ‬
      ‫ْل م ْن فـَْقد ٱ لْ َوحيد يَ ُكو ُن‬        ‫ِ‬
                                                     ‫َوٱلثُّك ُ‬



                   ‫ـجـ ُـو َيـْ ِـشــي ب ـَيْـن ـَـنَــا‬ ‫ـار ْحـت ـُ َـهــا َوٱلـ َّ‬
                                                      ‫ـشـ ْ‬                      ‫طَـ َ‬
      ‫ـن َوإِ نَّ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـي َلُبِـ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـن‬                                ‫َم ـ ــا إِ ْن تَ ـ ـبِـ ـ ُ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬            ‫ـب َرْم ـلَـ ِـة َعــالِـ ٍـج‬
                                          ‫ـج ِم ـ ْـن ُح ـ ِّ‬  ‫ِ‬
                                                           ‫ِب َل ع ـ ٌ‬
        ‫ٱلِــيــام ِبــا وحــيـ ُ ِ‬
      ‫ـث ٱ لْع ُ‬
      ‫ني‬          ‫ـث ْ َ ُ َ َ َ ْ‬               ‫َحـْـيـ ُ‬




‫‪46‬‬
Grief Between




A ringdove cooed
   A sad man yearned,
stirred by the echoing
   yearning and grief


At the sound of her cry,
   his eyes welled
like pools filling
   above a spring


She mourns her one
   and only: how deep
the loss of the only!
   I called


Back, as grief
   passed between us
I, revealed,
   she still hidden


At the sands of Ālij                       [5]
   I felt love’s sting—
white tents on slopes
   Eyes wide open




                           Grief Between   47
                     ‫ـض ـ ٍـة‬           ‫ِمـ ــن ُكـ ـ ِّـل فَــاتـِ ـ َك ـ ِـة ٱلْـ ـلِّ ـ ِ‬
                           ‫ـح ــاظ َم ـ ِري ـ َ‬
                                             ‫َ‬                                       ‫ْ‬
       ‫ـاظ ُج ـ ُفــو ُن‬  ‫أَج ـ َفــان ــهــا لِـظـُـى ٱلْ ـلِّــحـ ِ‬
                               ‫َ‬          ‫َ‬          ‫ْ َُ‬



                  ‫َج ـ ـ ـ َـرعُ َد ْم ـ َـع ـ ِـي ِمـ ـ ْـن ِع ـلَّـ ِـي‬  ‫َم ــا ِزلْ ـ ـ ُ‬
                                                                       ‫ـت أ ْ‬
       ‫َصــو ُن‬       ‫ٍِ‬                                          ‫أ ِ‬
             ‫ُخــفــي ٱ ْلـَ َـوى َعـ ْـن َعــاذل َوأ ُ‬                 ‫ْ‬



               ‫اب بِ ـب ـَ ْـي ــنِ ـ ِه ـ ْـم‬
                                            ‫ـاح ٱ لْ ـ ــغُـ ـ َـر ُ‬  ‫َحـ ـ َّـى إِ َذ ا َ‬
                                                                 ‫صـ ـ َ‬
       ‫اق صــبــاب ـةَ ٱلْــمــحــز ِ‬
       ‫ون‬                                               ‫ِ‬
          ‫ـضـ َـح ٱلْــف ـ َـر ُ َ َ َ َ ْ ُ‬                        ‫فَـ َ‬



                      ‫يس ِه ْم‬  ‫السرى قَطَعوا ٱ لْبـرى فَلِعِ ِ‬
                                                   ‫ُ َُ‬                                  ‫َو َ‬
                                                                                ‫صلُوا ُّ َ‬
                ‫ِ‬                              ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـحـ ــامـ ـ ِـل َرنـَّ ـ ـ ـ ـةٌ َوأَن ـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـن‬                                                            ‫َْتـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
                                                     ‫ـت ٱلْـ ـ َـمـ ـ َ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬             ‫ـاب ٱلْ ـ َـم ــنِـ ـيَّـ ِـة ِع ـْن ـ َـد َم ــا‬
                                                               ‫َسـ ــبَـ ـ َ‬   ‫ـت أ ْ‬ ‫َع ــاي ـَ ـْن ـ ُ‬
              ‫ِ‬
       ‫أ َْر َخ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْـوا أَ ِزَّم ـ ـتَـ ـ َـه ـ ــا َو ُشـ ـ ـ ـ َّـد َوضـ ـ ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـن‬



                                                                                  ‫إِ َّن ٱ لْ ـ ـ ـ ِـف ـ ـ ـ َـر َ‬
                      ‫اق َم ـ ـ َـع ٱ لْ ـ ـ ــغَ ـ ـ ـ َـر ِام لَـ ـ َق ــاتِ ـ ٌـل‬
                      ‫صــعــب ٱلْــغ ــر ِام م ــع ٱلْـلِّـ َقـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاء ي ـَ ُـهــو ُن‬                 ‫َ ْ ُ ََ َ َ‬


‫‪48‬‬
Gazes languid
   glances fatal
eyelids sheaths
   of glistening swords


I held back tears
   at the ache within,
hiding love from
   blame, acting


Till the crow cawed
   gone! exposing
the wild love of a
   man in sorrow


The riders pressed,
   spurring the camels,
red-­roans beneath
   the howdahs, groaning


As they cinched                               [10]
   the saddles and loosened
the reins, I beheld
   death’s cords before me


In love’s fever
   distance is mortal
Finding her would
   ease the pain


                              Grief Between    49
                  ‫اهـ ـ ــا إِنـَّـ ـ َـه ـ ــا‬
                                             ‫ول ِف َهـ ـ ـ َـو َ‬
                                                              ‫َم ـ ــا ِل َع ـ ـ ـ ـ ُذ ٌ‬
     ‫ـث تَـ ُكــو ُن‬‫ـشــوقَـةٌ َح ـ ْـس ــنَــاءُ َح ـ ْـي ـ ُ‬ ‫َمـ ْـعـ ُ‬




‫‪50‬‬
What do I care if
  they blame my loving?
She is loved where-­
  ever she turns




                          Grief Between   51
                                                                                                                                                       ‫‪14‬‬




                 ‫ـرق‬ ‫ـشـ ـ ِ‬‫ـحـ ـ َّـن إِ َل ٱ لـ ـ َّ‬
                                                    ‫َرأَى ٱ لْ ـ ـ ـب ـَ ـ ـ ْـر َق َشـ ـ ْـرق ـ ـيًّـ ــا فَـ ـ َ‬
      ‫ولَـ ـ ـ ـ ــو الَ ح َغـ ــرب ـ ـيًّـ ــا َل ـ ـ ـ َّـن إِ َل ٱ لْـ ـ ــغَـ ـ ــر ِ‬
      ‫ب‬ ‫ْ‬                                   ‫َ‬                ‫َ ْ َ ْ‬



                 ‫فَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـِإ َّن َغـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـر ِامـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــي بِـ ـ ـ ـ ــٱلْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َِـري ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـق َولَـ ـ ـ ـ ْـمـ ـ ـ ـ ِـحـ ـ ـ ـ ِـه‬
      ‫ولَـ ـ ْـي ـ ــس َغ ـ ــر ِام ـ ــي بِـ ـ ـ ْـٱلَمـ ـ ــاكِ ـ ـ ـ ِن وٱلـ ـ ـتـ ـ ــر ِ‬
      ‫ب‬ ‫َ ُْ‬                                          ‫َ‬                                     ‫َ َ َ‬



              ‫ـص ــبَ ــا َعـ ـنـْـ ُـه ـ ْـم َح ـ ِـد ي ــثً ــا ُم ـ َـع ـنْـ َـع ــنًــا‬
                                                                                         ‫ت ِل ٱ ل ـ َّ‬
                                                                                                     ‫َرَو ْ‬
      ‫عن َك ْرِب‬           ‫ِ‬      ‫ث َع ْن َو ْجدي َع ِن ْ‬  ‫ِ‬                   ‫َع ِن ٱلْبَ ِّ‬
              ‫ٱلُْزن ْ‬



                ‫ٱلس ْك ِر َع ْن َع ْقلِي َع ِن الش َّْو ِق َع ْن َج ًوى‬
                                                                    ‫َع ِن ُّ‬
      ‫الد ْم ِع َع ْن َج ْف ِن َع ِن ٱلنَّا ِر َع ْن قـَْلِب‬
                                                         ‫َع ِن َّ‬



                               ‫َن ٱلَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـذي ت ـ ـ ـ ـ ــهـ ـ ـ ـ ــواه بـ ـ ـ ـ ــن ض ـ ـلُـ ـ ِ‬
                 ‫ـوع ـ ـ ُكـ ـ ْـم‬                                                                       ‫بِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـأ َّ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                                       ‫َ ْ َ ُ َ َْ ُ‬
      ‫ت ـُ ـ َق ـ ـلِّـ ــبُـ ــهُ ْٱلَنـْـ ـ ـ َف ـ ـ ــاس َجـ ـْن ــبً ــا إِ َل َجـ ـْن ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـب‬                                    ‫ُ‬




‫‪52‬‬
Hadith of Love




Lightning flashed
   and he yearned for the East
Had it flashed from the West
   there he’d have turned


I burn for the lightning,
   the flash, not for this
or for some other
   piece of ground


The Eastwind brought us
   the word—from distraction
from rapture and sorrow
   from my disarray


From drunkenness, reason,
   longing and grief,
from the fire
   from my heart


The one you seek                                  [5]
   is within your ribs
turned in each breath
   from side to side




                                 Hadith of Love   53
                                        ‫ِ‬
                         ‫ـت َلـَــا ب ـَ ـلِّـ ـ ْغ إِلَـ ـ ْـيـ ــه بِـ ـأَنَّــهُ‬
                                                                                 ‫ف ـ ُق ـ ْل ـ ُ‬
                   ‫هو ٱ لْموقِ ُد النَّار ٱ لَِّت د ِ‬
     ‫اخل ٱ لْ َق ْلبِ‬
                  ‫َ َ‬             ‫َ‬                       ‫َُ ُ‬



                                          ‫فَـِإ ْن َكا َن إِطْ َفاءٌ ف ـََـو ْ‬
                           ‫صـ ٌـل ُمَلَّ ٌد‬
     ‫ب‬
     ‫لص ِّ‬
        ‫ب لَ َّ‬
              ‫اق فَ َل َذ نْ َ‬  ‫َوإِ ْن َكا َن إِ ْحـَـر ٌ‬




‫‪54‬‬
Tell him (I told them)
   he’s the one
who lit the fire
   within my heart


To be with you now
   alone would quench it
If it rages, why
   blame my love?




                           Hadith of Love   55
                                                                                       ‫‪15‬‬




                    ‫ـاد ُر ِون بِـ ــٱألُث ـَ ـ ْـيـ ـ ِـل َوٱلـ ـن ـَّـ َق ــا‬
                                                                            ‫َغ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
            ‫ٱلد ْم ِع َوأَ ْش ُكو ْ‬
      ‫ٱلَُرقَا‬                          ‫ب َّ‬         ‫َس ُك ُ‬   ‫أْ‬



                                     ‫ـت فِ ـي ـ ِـه َك ـ َـم ـ ًـدا‬
                                                                 ‫بِ ـ ـأَِب َمـ ـ ْـن ذُبْـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـت ِم ـ ـْنـ ــهُ ف ـَ ـ َـرقَـ ــا‬ ‫بِ ـ ـ ـأَِب َمـ ـ ـ ْـن ِمـ ـ ـ ُّ‬



                  ‫ـج ـ ـلَـ ـ ِـة ِف َو ْج ــنَ ــتِ ـ ِـه‬    ‫ُحْ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـرةُ ْ‬
                                                        ‫ٱلـَ ـ ْ‬
      ‫الش َف َقا‬ ‫ِ‬
             ‫ٱلصْب ِح يـُنَاغي َّ‬      ‫ـح ُّ‬  ‫ضـ ُ‬    ‫َو َ‬



                               ‫َسى‬ ‫َّب ْٱل َ‬       ‫الصبـُْر َوطَن َ‬             ‫ق ـَ َّـو َ‬
                                                                             ‫ض َّ‬
               ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـن ٰه ـ ـ َذيْ ـ ـ ِن ل ـ َق ــا‬
                                     ‫َوأَنـَ ـ ـ ـ ــا َم ـ ــا بـَـ ـ ـ ـ ْ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                      ‫َم ـ ْـن لِــبَـثِّــي َم ـ ْـن لِـ َـو ْج ـ ِـدي ُدلَّـ ِـي‬
      ‫ـب َعـ ِـشـ َقــا‬       ‫ِ‬                   ‫ِ‬
                         ‫َم ـ ْـن لُ ـ ْـزِن َم ـ ْـن لـ َ‬
                     ‫ـصـ ٍّ‬




‫‪56‬‬
Just a Flash




They left me between
   Utháyl and White Dune,
scattering tears
   and shouting fire!


My father’s life
   for the one I mourn,
in whom I disap-­
   peared parting


On his cheek a tinge
   of shyness, dawn
light whispering
   into dusk


Patience decamps,
   sorrow pitches
its tent and I am
   frozen in place


Who will guide me                          [5]
   through the thrall
and throes of this
   unending love?




                            Just a Flash   57
                       ‫ـت ت ـَــبَـ ــا ِريـ ـ َـح ٱ ْل ـَ ـ َـوى‬       ‫ُك ـلَّـ َـم ــا ُ‬
                                                               ‫صـ ـْن ـ ُ‬
       ‫ٱلَـ َـوى َو ْٱل ََرقَ ــا‬  ‫َّمـ ُـع ْ‬  ‫ـضـ َـح ٱلــد ْ‬  ‫فَـ َ‬



                                                                   ‫فَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـِإ َذ ا قـ ـُ ـ ـ ْلـ ـ ـ ُ‬
                         ‫ـت َهـ ـ ـب ـ ـ ُـوا ِل نَـ ـ ـظْ ـ ـ َـرةً‬
       ‫قِ ـ ـيـ ـ َـل َمـ ـ ــا ُتـْ ـ ــنَـ ـ ـ ُـع إِ َّل َشـ ـ َفـ ـ َق ــا‬



                                                        ‫ـســى تـ ـُ ْغــنِ ـيـ َ‬
                         ‫ـك ِم ـنْـ ُـه ـ ْـم نَـظْـ َـرةٌ‬                    ‫َم ــا َعـ َ‬
                           ‫ٍ‬                              ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
                                       ‫ه ـ ـ َـي إ َّل لَـ ـ ْـمـ ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـح بـَـ ـ ـ ْـرق ب ـَ ـ َـرقَـ ــا‬



                        ‫ادي بِِ ْم‬    ‫ٱل ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬
                                        ‫ت أَنْ َسى إ ْذ َح َدا َْ‬   ‫لَ ْس ُ‬
                              ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـن وي ـَْـبــغــي ْٱلَب ـْ َـرقَــا‬              ‫يَـطْـلُـ ُ‬
                                          ‫ـب ٱلْ ـب ـَ ْ َ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                     ‫ـن بِِـ ـ ْـم‬   ‫ـت أَ ْغ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِربَـ ـ ـ ـةُ ٱلْ ـ ـ ـب ـَ ـ ـ ْ ِ‬
                                                                                           ‫نـَـ ـ َـعـ ـ ـ َق ـ ـ ْ‬
       ‫َل َر َعـ ـ ــى ٱ لـ ـلَّ ــهُ غُـ ـ َـرابـً ــا نـَـ َـع ـ َق ــا‬



                       ‫ـن إِ َّل َجَـ ـ ـ ٌـل‬
                                            ‫اب ٱ لْ ـ ـ ـب ـَ ـ ـ ْ ِ‬
                                                                    ‫َمـ ـ ــا غُ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـر ُ‬
                         ‫ـاب نَـ ًّ‬
       ‫ـصــا َع ـن ـَ َقــا‬         ‫َح ــب ـ ِ‬            ‫سـ ِ‬
                                          ‫ـار ب ـ ْـٱل ْ َ‬        ‫َ َ‬


‫‪58‬‬
I’d ’ve concealed
   the anguish but tears
and bleary eyes
   gave me away


Just a glance?
   I ask but they say,
we hold back only
   out of compassion


Never will
   a glance release you
It’s only a flash
   crackling the night


I’ll never forget
   how they left for Ábraq
to the chants of guides
   chanting them on their way


Gone! cawed                                    [10]
   the crows of departure
God curse every
   crow that caws!


Parting’s crow
   is but a camel
bearing your love
   swiftly away


                                Just a Flash    59
                                                                                              ‫‪16‬‬




                               ‫َح ْلن علَى ٱ لْيـعم َل ِ‬
                          ‫ت ْ‬
                    ‫ٱلُ ُد َ‬
                   ‫ورا‬              ‫َْ َ‬        ‫ََ َ‬
      ‫ورا‬ ‫د‬ ‫ب‬‫ْ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬‫و‬  ‫ى‬  ‫ٱلد‬
                      ‫ُّم‬    ‫ا‬‫يه‬‫ِ‬
                                ‫ف‬ ‫ن‬  ‫ع‬ ‫د‬ ‫َو‬ ‫أ‬‫و‬
       ‫َ ْ َ ْ َ َ َ َ ُُ َ‬



                     ‫ـي أَ ْن يـَـ ْـرِجـ ـع ـ ُـوا‬
                                                  ‫ِ‬                            ‫َوَو َ‬
                                                 ‫اع ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْد َن قَـ ـ ْلـ ـ َ‬
                       ‫ٱلـُ ـ ُ ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـود إ َّل غُـ ـ ُـر َ‬
      ‫ورا‬                         ‫َو َهـ ـ ْـل تَــع ـ ُـد ْ‬



                 ‫ـابـَ ــا لِـ ـ ـ ْلـ ـ ـ َـو َد ِاع‬
                                                  ‫وحـ ـ ـ ـيَّـ ـ ــت بِـ ــع ـ ـنَّـ ـ ِ‬
                                                              ‫ََ ْ ُ‬
      ‫ٱلسعِ َريا‬        ‫ِ‬
             ‫فَ ـأَ ْ َ ْ ُ ُ ً ُ ُ َّ‬
                 ‫ـج‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ت‬   ‫ـا‬ ‫ـ‬‫ـوع‬      ‫ـ‬ ‫م‬ ‫د‬   ‫ت‬   ‫ر‬    ‫ذ‬



                             ‫ـت‬                                ‫فَـ ـل ـ َّـم ــا تـَـ ـ ـ َـولَّـ ـ ـ ْ‬
                             ‫ـت َوقَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْد َيـَّ ـ َـمـ ـ ْ‬
      ‫ـس ـ ِـد ي ـ َـرا‬
                     ‫ٱلَـ ـ َـوْرنَـ ـ َـق ُثَّ ٱ ل ـ َّ‬  ‫تـُ ـ ِري ـ ُـد ْ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                    ‫ـورا َعـ ـلَ ــى إِث ـ ـ ِرِهـ ـ ْـم‬            ‫َد َع ـ ـ ـ ْـو ُ‬
                                                        ‫ت ث ـُ ــبُـ ـ ً‬
       ‫ـت أَتَـ ْدعُ ـوا ث ـُـبُـ َ‬
      ‫ـورا‬                              ‫ت َوقَــالـ ْ‬  ‫فـَـ َـرَّد ْ‬




‫‪60‬‬
Star Shepherd




They placed the howdahs
  on long-­stride camels,
full moons within curtains,
  statues of stone


O they’d return!
  or so they vowed
Beauty’s promise,
  delusion


They bid farewell
  with henna-­tipped fingers,
unloosed their tears
  yet stoked a fire


They set off for Yemen
  then turned toward
Khawárnaq then
  toward Sadīr


Damn it! I cried                                [5]
  as they departed
If you want to cry
  damn it, they said




                                Star Shepherd   61
                              ‫فَـ ـ ـ َـا تَـ ـ ـ ْدعـ ـ ــو َّن ِب ـ ـ ــا و ِ‬
                   ‫اح ـ ـ ـ ًـدا‬ ‫ُ َ َ َ‬
       ‫ـرا‬ ‫ِ‬                                    ‫وٰلـ ِ‬
                                 ‫ـك ـنَّـ َـمــا ْ‬
                  ‫ٱدعُ ثـُــبُ ـ ً‬
        ‫ـورا َكــثـ َ‬                                  ‫َ‬



                 ‫اك قَــلِ ـي ـاً‬ ‫أ ََل ي ــا َح ـ ــام ْٱلَر ِ‬
                                     ‫َ َ َ َ‬
            ‫ِ‬       ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـن إ َّل َهد َيرا‬
                      ‫فَ َما َز َاد َك ٱ لْـب ـَ ْ ُ‬



                    ‫ـام‬      ‫ـك يَــا أَي ـُّ َـهــا َذا ْ‬
                    ‫ٱلَـ َـمـ ُ‬                         ‫َون ـَ ْـو ُح ـ َ‬
       ‫ورا‬            ‫يُثِري ٱ لْم ُش َ ِ‬
        ‫وق يُهي ُج ٱ لْغَيُ َ‬      ‫ُ َ‬



                       ‫ـاد‬                                                   ‫ِ‬
                       ‫ود ال ـ ُّـرقَـ َ‬                                ‫يُــذي ـ ُ‬
                                         ‫ـب ٱلْـ ـ ُف ـ َـؤ َاد يَـ ـ ُذ ُ‬
           ‫ِ‬                                       ‫يـ ِ‬
        ‫ـف أَ ْشـ َـواق ـَـنَــا َوٱلـ َّـزفـ َ‬
       ‫ـرا‬                                   ‫ـضــاعـ ُ‬  ‫َُ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                          ‫ـام لِـ ـنـَـ ْـو ِح ْ‬
                 ‫ٱلَـ َـم ـ ِـام‬                          ‫َي ــوم ِْ‬
                                                 ‫ٱل ـ َـم ـ ُ‬ ‫ُ ُ‬
       ‫ـرا‬
         ‫ـ‬ ‫ف ــنَــس ـأ َُل ِمـْنــه ٱلْـب ـ َقــاء يـ ِ‬
           ‫ـس‬
        ‫ُ َ ََ َ‬                                ‫َ ْ‬



                      ‫عسى نـ ْفحةٌ ِمن صبا ح ِ‬
                   ‫اج ٍر‬ ‫َ َ َ َ ْ ََ َ‬
            ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـوق إِلَـي ـْـنَــا َس َحابًا َمط َريا‬
                                          ‫ـسـ ُ‬
                                              ‫تَـ ُ‬


‫‪62‬‬
Why this single
   cry of damnation?
Damn it, damn it,
   damn it again!


Easy now, dove
   of the persica
thicket, departure
   has sharpened your cry


Your cooing stirs
   this lover,
inflaming a man
   already afire


It melts the heart,
   drives off sleep,
whets our longing,
   compounds our sighs


Death hovers                                [10]
   in a dove’s cry
I ask remission
   if just for a time


May the Eastwind
   as it hails from Hājir
soothe us with
   a cooling rain


                            Star Shepherd    63
                          ‫ـس ــا قَـ ـ ْد ظَـ ِـمـ ْـئـ َـن‬                ‫ِ‬
                                                         ‫تـُـ ـ َـرِّوي بَــا أَنـْـ ُف ـ ً‬
                        ‫ـحــبـ َ ِ‬
        ‫ـك إ َّل نـُـ ُف ـ َ‬
       ‫ـورا‬                         ‫فَـ َـمــا ْٱزَد َاد ُسـ ْ ُ‬



                     ‫ـجـ ِم ُكـ ْـن ِل نـَ ِـدميـًـا‬              ‫ِ‬
                                                  ‫ف ـَـيَــا َراع ـ َـي الـنَّـ ْ‬
           ‫ِ‬                   ‫ِ‬             ‫ِ‬
        ‫َويَــا َســاهـ َـر ٱلْ ـبَـ ْـرق ُكـ ْـن ِل َسـ َ‬
       ‫ـرا‬



                                                                                                ‫ِ‬
                         ‫َويـَ ـ ـ ــا َراقـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـد ال ـ ـلَّـ ـ ْـي ـ ـ ِـل ُه ـ ـنِّـ ـ ْـئـ ــتَـ ــهُ‬
       ‫ـورا‬                                      ‫ِ‬
                       ‫ف ـَ َقـ ْـبـ َـل ٱلْـ َـمـ َـمــات َعـ َـمـ ْـر َ‬
        ‫ت ٱلْـ ُقــبُـ َ‬



‫]‪[15‬‬                         ‫ت تـَْه َوى ٱ لْ َفتَا َة ٱ لْ َع ُروبَا‬        ‫فـَلَ ْو ُكْن َ‬
       ‫ورا‬        ‫ـت ٱل ـنَّــعِ ـي ـ َـم ِبَـ ــا َوٱل ـ ـ ُّ‬
        ‫ـس ـ ـ ُـر َ‬
                                                                      ‫ِ‬
                                                            ‫لَ ــنـ ـ ْل ـ َ‬



                      ‫ٱلـُ َـمــا ِر‬                 ‫ـاطــي ِْ‬
                                                           ‫ت ــعـ ِ‬
                                  ‫ـور ْ‬           ‫ٱلـ َ‬
                                     ‫ـســا َن ُخُـ َ‬           ‫َُ‬
       ‫ورا‬ ‫د‬ ‫ب‬‫ْ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ي‬ ‫ِ‬
                    ‫اغ‬   ‫ن‬ ‫ـ‬‫ت‬     ‫وس‬  ‫ٱلش‬
                                     ‫ُّم‬     ‫ي‬ ‫اج‬‫ِ‬  ‫ن‬ ‫ـ‬‫ت‬
        ‫ُُ َ‬             ‫ُ َ َُ‬                     ‫َُ‬




‫‪64‬‬
And quench each
   parched soul
Yet your rain clouds
   fly further away


You, star shepherd,
   let’s drink by night
and you, lightning-­gazer,
   be my companion


And you, who
   sleep the night away
self-­entombed
   before you die


If only you’d loved                           [15]
   a brave beauty
you’d have found
   what you desired


You’d be sharing wine
   with the ladies,
confiding in the sun,
   whispering with the moon




                              Star Shepherd    65
                                                                                       ‫‪17‬‬




                ‫يس َل تـَْع َج ْل ِبَا َوقِ َفا‬      ‫ي ٱلْعِ ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
                                                                           ‫يَا َحاد َ‬
      ‫فَـ ـ ـِإ نـَّ ـ ـ ِـي زِم ـ ـ ـ ــن ِف إِثْـ ـ ـ ِره ـ ــا َغ ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد‬            ‫َ‬                ‫َ ٌ‬



            ‫ـف بِــٱلْـ َـم ـطَــايَــا َو َشِّـ ـ ْـر ِم ـ ْـن أَ ِزَّم ــتِـ َـه ــا‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                                                    ‫قـ ْ‬
        ‫يح يا ح ِ‬
      ‫اد ي‬ ‫َّب ِ َ َ‬              ‫ٱهلل بِٱ لْو ْج ِد بِٱلت ِْ‬   ‫بِ ِ‬
                                                       ‫َ‬



                                        ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ـك ــن َل تـُـسـ ِ‬                    ‫ِ‬
             ‫ـاعـ ُـد َهــا‬ ‫َ‬       ‫نـَـ ْفــســي تُـ ِري ـ ُـد َوٰل ـ ْ‬
      ‫اق وإِسع ِ‬   ‫ٍ‬                         ‫ِ‬
      ‫اد‬ ‫ِر ْجلي فَ َم ْن ِل بِِإ ْش َف َ ْ َ‬



                   ‫ِّحريُِر ِف ُشغُ ٍل‬         ‫ٱلصنَ ُع ٱلن ْ‬       ‫َمــا ي ـَ ْفـ َـعـ ُـل َّ‬
      ‫َآلتـُ ـ ـ ـ ــه آ َذنـَ ـ ـ ـ ــت فِ ـ ـيـ ـ ِـه بِـ ـِإفْـ ــسـ ــادِ‬
             ‫َ‬                             ‫ْ‬                 ‫ُ‬



                                ‫ِ ِ‬                                    ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                      ‫َع ـ ِّـر ْج فَــفــي أ َْيَـ ـ ِن ٱلْ ـ ـ َـوادي خــيَـ ُ‬
               ‫ـامـ ُـهـ ُـم‬
      ‫لِـ ـ ٰلّ ـ ِـه َد ُّر َك َم ــا َْتـ ـ ِوي ـ ِـه يَــا َو ِاد ي‬




‫‪66‬‬
God Curse My Love




Slow down, red-­roan
   drivers, stop—
I’m worn out, broken,
   fallen behind


Whoa, stop,
   pull in the reins,
by God and by the
   pain and passion!


My spirit is willing
   but my legs are weak
Who’s here for me now
   with help and cheer?


When the skilled craftsman
   finds his tools
of no avail—
   what can he do?


Look! Their tents                                [5]
   are on the right
God bless you, wádi,
   for what you hold




                             God Curse My Love   67
             ‫ت قـَْو ًما ُه ُم نـَْف ِسي َو ُه ْم نـََف ِسي‬
                                                          ‫َجَ ْع َ‬
       ‫ِ‬         ‫ِ‬     ‫ِ‬
     ‫َو ُه ْم َس َو ُاد ُس َويْ َد ا خ ْلب أَ ْكبَاد ي‬



                              ‫َل َد َّر َد ُّر ٱ ْل ـَ َـوى إِ ْن َلْ أ َُم ـ ْ‬
               ‫ـت َكـ َـمـ ًـد ا‬
                                                     ‫ِبـ ـ ِ‬
     ‫ـاج ـ ـ ٍر أَو بِــس ـ ْل ـ ٍع أَو بِـ ـأَج ــي ـ ِ‬
     ‫ـاد‬ ‫ْ َْ‬                        ‫ْ َ‬                     ‫َ‬




‫‪68‬‬
You hold a people
   who are my soul,
my breath and the dark
   of my liver’s caul


God curse my love
   if grief doesn’t take me
at Hājir, at Salʿ
   or in Ajyâdī




                              God Curse My Love   69
                                                                      ‫‪18‬‬




                   ‫ب ْٱلَطْـ َـا َل‬‫ـف بِــٱلْــمــنَــا ِزِل وٱنْـ ُـد ِ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                           ‫قـ ْ َ‬
                  ‫ٱلربوع ٱ لــدَّا ِرسـ ِ‬
      ‫ـات ُسـ َـؤ َال‬ ‫َ‬            ‫َو َسـ ِـل ُّ ُ َ‬



             ‫يس ُه ْم‬    ‫ســار ِ‬                                ‫أَيــن ْٱل ِ‬
                    ‫تع ُ‬     ‫َ َْ‬              ‫َحـبَّـةُ أَيْـ َـن‬    ‫َْ‬
      ‫ٱآلل‬
      ‫َ‬    ‫ِ‬
           ‫اب‬    ‫ب‬ ‫ي‬‫ْ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬  ‫ف‬‫ِ‬ ‫تـَْقطَ ُع‬        ‫يك‬
                                               ‫َ َ‬      ‫ِ‬
                                                        ‫ات‬ ‫ه‬
                 ‫ََ‬



                              ‫ـســر ِ‬
             ‫اب ت ـََـر ُاهـ ُـم‬               ‫ِمـثْــل ْ ِ ِ ِ‬
                                 ‫ٱلَـ َـدائــق ف الـ َّ َ‬ ‫ُ‬
      ‫ٱآلل‬
      ‫َ‬    ‫ِ‬
           ‫ـون‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ـي‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـع‬‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                          ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ف‬‫ِ‬ ‫ـم‬‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫ـظ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـع‬‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬  ‫ل‬
                                                ‫ُ‬ ‫َل‬
                                                   ‫ْ‬ ‫أ‬
                 ‫ُُ‬              ‫ُْ ُ‬



                ‫ـب لِــيَـ ْشـَـربـُوا‬
                                    ‫ـاروا يُـ ِريــدو َن ٱلْــعُـ َذيْـ َ‬
                                                                      ‫َس ـ ُ‬
              ‫ِ‬                            ‫ِ‬ ‫ِ‬
                            ‫َم ـ ـ ــاءً بِـ ــه م ـ ـثْـ ـ َـل ْ‬
      ‫ٱلَـ ــيَ ـ ــاة ُزالََل‬



             ‫ٱلصبَا‬
                ‫يح َّ‬   ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬
                      ‫َل َعنـْ ُه ُم ر َ‬    ‫تأْ‬
                                        ‫َسأ ُ‬ ‫فـََق َف ْو ُ‬
      ‫ٱستَظَلُّوا الض َ‬
      ‫َّال‬           ‫َه ْل َخيَّ ُموا أَ ِو ْ‬




‫‪70‬‬
As Cool as Life




Halt at the stations,
   grieve at the ruins,
then ask the meadows
   so desolate now


Where are those
   we loved and their roans?
Over there, cutting
   through the desert haze


They loom before you
   like a garden mirage—
large silhouettes
   in the mist


They’ve gone in search
   of al-­ʿUdháyb
to drink at its waters
   cool as life


I tracked after them,                            [5]
   asking the Eastwind
Did they pitch their tents
   or find lote’s shade?




                               As Cool as Life   71
                    ‫ود قِــبَــا ب ـَ ُـهـ ْـم‬
                                            ‫ـت َعلَى َزُر َ‬             ‫قَــا لَـ ْ‬
                                                           ‫ـت ت ـََـرْكـ ُ‬
       ‫يس تَ ْش ُكو ِم ْن ُسَراهُ َك َل َل‬               ‫ِ‬
                                                    ‫َوٱ لْع ُ‬



                    ‫صا ِونًا‬             ‫ِ ِ‬
                              ‫َس َد ُلوا فـَْو َق ٱ لْقبَاب َم َ‬      ‫قَ ْد أ ْ‬
       ‫يَـ ْـس ـت ـُْـر َن ِمـ ْـن َحـ ِّـر ٱ ْلـَ ِـج ـ ِر َجَـ َـال‬



                         ‫ـارُه ـ ْـم‬             ‫ِ‬             ‫فَــٱنْـ َـه ـ ْ ِ ِ‬
                                   ‫ـض إلَـ ْـي ـه ـ ْـم طَــال ــبًــا آثَـ َ‬
                                                                ‫ِ‬
                                         ‫َو ْٱرقـ ـ ْـل بِـعـيِـ ِـسـ َ‬
       ‫ـك َْن ـ َـو ُه ـ ْـم إِ ْرقَ ـ َـال‬



                             ‫ـال حـ ِ‬    ‫ِ‬
                       ‫ـاجـ ٍر‬   ‫ـت َعـلَــى َمـ َـعـ َ‬               ‫فَـ ـِإ َذا َوقـَـ ْف ـ َ‬
       ‫ـت أَ ْغـ ـ ـ ـ َـو ًارا ِبـَ ــا َوِج ــبَ ـ َـال‬
                                                       ‫َوقَـ ـطَـ ْـع ـ َ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                ‫ـارُه ـ ْـم‬   ‫ـت َم ــنَــا ِزُل ـُ ْـم َوَل َحـ ـ ْ‬
                            ‫ـت نَـ ُ‬                                  ‫قـَـ ُـربَـ ْ‬
       ‫ت ٱ ْلـََـوى إِ ْش َع َال‬  ‫نَــار قَـ ْد أَ ْشعلَ ِ‬
                                      ‫َ‬                 ‫ٌ‬



                                                           ‫ِ‬                 ‫ِ‬
                                      ‫ـك أ ْ‬
                         ‫ُس ـ ُـد َه ــا‬       ‫فَـ ـأَنِـ ْـخ بَــا َل يـ ـُ ْـره ـبـَـنَّـ َ‬
                                                ‫ـٱل ْش ــتِ ــيَ ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـاق يُـ ِري ـ َك ـ َـه ــا أَ ْش ــبَ ـ َـال‬                  ‫فَ ـ ِْ‬



‫‪72‬‬
She said she left them
   at Drifting Sands,
their camels groaning
   through the night journey


They lowered a curtain
   over the flaps
of their tents, sheltering
   beauty from the sun


So set off, friends,
   in their tracks
on amber camels
   pacing in pursuit


Halt near the waymarks
   of Hājir, then
cross its canyons
   and ascend its ridge


As you near them                                 [10]
   a fire will flare
before you and
   ignite your longing


Kneel your camels
   Don’t fear their lions
In desire’s fire
   they’ll look like cubs


                               As Cool as Life    73
                                                                                      ‫‪19‬‬




                             ‫يَــا طَـلَ ـاً ِع ـْنـ َـد ْٱلُثـَـ ْـي ـ ِـل َدا ِر َس ــا‬
      ‫ـس ـ ــا‬   ‫ِ‬                           ‫َلع ـ ــب ـ ـ ِ ِ‬
            ‫ـت فـ ـي ــه ُخ ـ ـ ـ ـ َّـرًدا أ ََوان ـ ـ َ‬
                                                        ‫َْ ُ‬



                           ‫س َكا َن م ْؤنِسا وض ِ‬
                       ‫اح ًكا‬                     ‫بِ ْٱل َْم ِ‬
                              ‫ُ ً َ َ‬
      ‫وحشاً َو َعا بِ َسا‬‫َضحى م ِ‬
                           ‫َوٱ لْيـَْو َم أ ْ َ ُ‬



                     ‫نَ ـ ـأ َْوا َو َلْ أَ ْش ــعُ ـ ْـر ُه ـ ُـم فَـ َـم ــا َد َرْوا‬
      ‫ض ِم ِريي َحا ِر َسا‬            ‫ِ‬
                          ‫َن َعلَْي ِه ْم م ْن َ‬              ‫أ َّ‬



                                                         ‫يـَـْت ـب ـَـعُـ ُـهـ ْـم َحـ ْـيـ ُ‬
                        ‫ـث نَـ ـأ َْوا َو َخ ـيَّـ ُـم ـوا‬
      ‫ـســا‬‫ِ‬                            ‫ِ‬
         ‫َوقَـ ـ ْد يَ ـ ُك ــو ُن ل ـ ْلـ َـم ـطَــايـَـا َســائـ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                      ‫َحـ ـ َّـى إِ َذ ا َحـ ـلُّـ ـوا بِ ـ َق ـ ْف ـ ٍر بـَـ ْل ـ َق ـ ٍع‬
      ‫ـســا‬ ‫َّ ِ‬
         ‫َو َخ ـيَّـ ُـم ـوا َوٱف ـْ ـتـَـ َـر ُشـ ـوا ٱلـطــنَــافـ َ‬




‫‪74‬‬
The Tombs of Those Who Loved Them




O windswept ruin at Utháyl
      where I would play
             with lissome girls
who knew discretion


Yesterday, it embraced us
      laughing      Today
             it frowns
in desolation


They left as if
      I’d no clue
             Little did they know
my eye within


Could see and follow them
      to their encampment—
             it might’ve been me
leading their camels—


Until they halted                                                       [5]
      in the Barrenlands
             spread their tents
and unfurled their carpets




                                    The Tombs of Those Who Loved Them   75
                        ‫ـاد بِِـ ـ ْـم َرْوضـ ـ ـاً أَ َغ ـ ـ َّـن يَــانِـ ًـعــا‬
                                                                               ‫َعـ ـ َ‬
         ‫ِ‬
     ‫م ْن بـَْعد َما قَ ْد َكا َن قـَْفًرا يَا ب َسا‬   ‫ِ‬           ‫ِ‬



                           ‫َمــا ن ـَ َـزلُـوا ِم ـ ْـن َم ـْن ـ ِزٍل إَِّل َحـ َـوى‬
     ‫ضـ ـ ــهُ طَ ـ َـوا ِو َس ــا‬      ‫ٱلِ ــس ـ ِ‬           ‫ِ‬
                                 ‫ـان َرْو ُ‬ ‫م ـ َـن ْ َ‬



                               ‫ت‬‫َوَل نَ ـأ َْوا َعـ ْـن َم ـْن ـ ِزٍل إَِّل َحـ َـو ْ‬
                                                    ‫ِِ‬              ‫ِ‬
                               ‫م ـ ْـن َعــاشــق ـي ـ ِهـ ْـم أ َْر ُ‬
     ‫ضـ ــهُ نـَـ َـوا ِو َس ــا‬




‫‪76‬‬
Brought back to a garden
     moist colors
           singing
on drought-­cracked ground


Wherever they stopped
     for midday rest
           blossomed into
peacock splendor


When they struck camp
     they left a land
           bearing the tombs
of those who loved them




                               The Tombs of Those Who Loved Them   77
                                                                                 ‫‪20‬‬




                         ‫ـضـ ِـة ْٱلَج ـف ـ ِ‬
                         ‫ـان‬                                                   ‫ِ‬
                                                       ‫َمـ َـر ِضــي م ـ ْـن َم ـ ِريـ َ‬
                                       ‫ْ‬
     ‫َعـ ـ ـ ـلِّ ـ ـ ـ َـاِن بِ ـ ـ ِـذ ْكـ ـ ـ ِرَه ـ ــا َع ـ ـلِّـ ـ َـاِن‬




                     ‫ت‬                ‫الريَ ِ‬                   ‫ه َف ِ‬
                                             ‫ت ٱ لْ ُوْر ُق بِ ِّ‬
                        ‫اض َونَ َ‬
                      ‫اح ْ‬                                           ‫َ‬
     ‫ٱلَـ َـمـ ِـام ِمـَّـا َش َج ِان‬
                                   ‫َش ْج ُو ٰهـ َذ ا ْ‬



                       ‫ـادى‬                ‫بِـ ـ ـأَِب طَ ـ ْف ـل ـةٌ لَ ــعُ ـ ٌ‬
                            ‫ـوب ت ـَـ َـهـ ـ َ‬
                                            ‫ِمن بـنَ ِ‬
                   ‫ٱلـُ ُـد و ِر ب ـَ ْ َ‬
     ‫ـن ٱ لْغَ َو ِان‬                  ‫ات ْ‬      ‫ْ َ‬



                         ‫ـان َشْ ًسا فـَلَ َّما‬    ‫ت ِف ٱ لْــعِــيـ ِ‬
                                                                     ‫طَلَ َع ْ‬
                                                      ‫َ‬
     ‫ـت بِـ ـأُفْ ـ ِـق َجــنَـ ِـان‬                 ‫أَف ـَ ـلَ ـ ْ‬
                                   ‫ـت أ ْش ـ َـرقَ ـ ْ‬




‫‪78‬‬
In a Bad Way




I’m in a bad
   way, lost
in the languor
   of her eyes


Say her name
   and heal me—
Recalling her’s
   my only cure


Doves rustled
   in the green, cooing,
sad with the same
   sadness that’s mine


My father’s life!
   His life for a girl
walking proud
   among the wives


In my eyes she
   rose like the sun
then set aglow
   on my heart’s horizon




                           In a Bad Way   79
                   ‫ي ــا طـُ ـلُــوالً بِ ــرام ـ ٍـة دا ِرسـ ـ ـ ٍ‬
                   ‫ـات‬
‫]‪[5‬‬
                          ‫ََ َ َ‬                                 ‫َ‬
       ‫ب و ِحسانِ‬ ‫َكم رأَت ِمن َكو ِ‬
                ‫اع ٍ‬
          ‫َ َ‬        ‫َْ ْ ْ َ‬



                      ‫ال َربِـ ـي ـ ٌ‬
                     ‫ـب‬              ‫بِـ ـ ـ ـأَِب ُثَّ ِب َغـ ـ ـ ـ َـز ٌ‬
       ‫َضـلُــعِــي ِف أَمـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬                 ‫ـن أ ْ‬                  ‫ِ‬
           ‫َ‬                      ‫ي ـَْـرتَــعــي ب ـَ ْ َ‬



                                                                    ‫ِِ‬
                                ‫َما َعلَْيه م ْن نَا ِرَها فـَْه َو نُ ٌ‬
                               ‫ور‬
       ‫ٰهـ ـ َكـ ـ َذا الـ ـنُّ ــور ُمْ ـ ِـم ـ ُـد ٱلـ ـنِّ ــر ِ‬
       ‫ان‬‫َ‬                            ‫ُ‬



                                  ‫يَ ــا َخ ــلِ ـي ـلَـ َّـي َع ـ ِّـر َج ــا بِــعِــنَـ ِـان‬
       ‫ِل ََرى َر ْس ـ ـ َـم َد ا ِرَهـ ـ ـ ــا بِــعِــيَـ ِـان‬



                                      ‫فَـِإ َذ ا َمــا بـَلَ ْغتُ َما ا لـ َّـد َار ُحطَّا‬
       ‫ـك ــيَ ـ ِـان‬                          ‫ِ‬
                   ‫ـاح ـ ــي ف ـ ـ ْل ــتَ ــب ـ ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
                       ‫ص ـ ـ ََّ َ ْ‬                 ‫َوبـَ ـ ــا َ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                                  ‫وقِ َفا ِب َعلَى ٱلطُّلُ ِ‬
                            ‫ول قَلِيالً‬                        ‫َ‬
       ‫ـك ِمَّــا َد َه ـ ِـان‬
                             ‫ن ــتَــبــا َكــى ب ــل أَب ـ ِ‬
                                ‫َْ ْ‬                ‫ََ‬


‫‪80‬‬
O ruins in Râma,                         [5]
   wasted now—
what splendor
   you once beheld!


My father’s life
   my own! for
a gazelle browsing
   within my ribs


What burns for her
   there is light
and only light
   can quell this fire


Take the reins,
   friends, as traces
of her camp emerge
   before my eyes


When we arrive
   at that place
dismount and weep
   for me there


Support me then                         [10]
   or try, even
as I face mis-­
   fortune alone


                         In a Bad Way    81
                   ‫اش ـ ـ ِـق ـ ــي بِـ ــغَ ـ ـ ِْـر ِسـ ـ َـهـ ـ ٍـام‬
                                                                     ‫أَ ْل ـ ـ ـ ـ ــوى ر ِ‬
                                                                       ‫َ َ َ‬
       ‫أَ ْل ـ ـ ـ ــوى قَ ــاتِــلِ ــي بِـ ــغَـ ـ ِـر ِس ــنَ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬          ‫ْ‬                                      ‫َ َ‬



                                             ‫َعـ ـ ـ ِّـرفَـ ـ ــاين إِ َذ ا بَـ ـ َكـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ُ‬
                   ‫ـت لَـ ـ َـد ي ـْ ـ َـهـ ــا‬
       ‫تُ ْسعِ َد ِان َعلَى أَلْبُ َكا تُ ْسعِ َد ِان‬



                      ‫ـث ِه ـْنـ ٍـد َولُ ـبْـ َـى‬    ‫ِ‬
                                                ‫َوٱذْ ُك ـ ـ َـرا ِل َح ــدي ـ َ‬
       ‫ـب و ِعـ ــنَـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬                 ‫ٍ‬
                     ‫َو ُسـ ـلَ ـ ْـي ـ َـم ــى َوَزيـْـ ــنَ ـ ـ َ‬



                          ‫ـاج ـ ـ ٍر وزر ٍ‬
                          ‫ود‬                         ‫ُثَّ ِزي ـ ـ ـ ـ َـد ا ِم ـ ــن ح ـ ـ ِ‬
                               ‫ََُ‬                             ‫ْ َ‬
       ‫َخ ـ ـب ـِّ ـ َـرا َع ـ ـ ْـن َم ـ ـ َـراتـِ ـ ـ ِع ٱلْ ـ ــغِ ـ ـ ْـزَل ِن‬



‫]‪[15‬‬                        ‫ـس َولَ ـيـْـلَــى‬   ‫َوٱنْـ ـ ُـدبَـ ـ ِـان بِـ ِـش ـ ْـع ـ ِر قـَـ ْـي ـ ٍ‬
       ‫َوِبَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍّـى َوٱلْـ ـ ُـمـ ـ ْـب ـ ـتـَـ ـلَـ ــى َغ ـ ـ ْـي ـ ـ َـا ِن‬



                                        ‫ـال َش ــوقِــي لِـ ِـط ـ ْف ـلَـ ٍـة َذ ِ‬
                            ‫ات نـَـثْ ـ ٍر‬                                               ‫طَ ـ َ ْ‬
       ‫ونِـ ـ ـ ـ ـظَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍـام وِم ـ ـ ـ ـ ـْنـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍـر وبـ ـ ـ ـ ــي ـ ـ ـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬       ‫َ ََ َ‬                                   ‫َ‬                            ‫َ‬


‫‪82‬‬
Love struck—
   without an arrow,
without a spear
   she put me away


Tell me again
   as I stand there weeping
will you stay
   by my side?


Remind me of Hind
   and of Lúbna,
Suláyma, Záynab
   and ʿInān


And what transpired
   at Zarūd and Hājir
and out in the wilds
   among gazelles


Then sing my loss                            [15]
   with the verse of Qays
and Láyla, Máyya
   and stricken Ghaylān


Long is my longing
   for a young girl—
harmony in verse,
   in prose, in oration


                              In a Bad Way    83
              ‫وك ِم ْن َد ا ِر ف ـُْـر ٍس‬        ‫ِمن بـنَ ِ‬
                                       ‫ات ٱ لْملُ ِ‬
                                           ‫ُ‬         ‫ْ َ‬
       ‫ِمن أَجـ ِّـل ٱ لْبِ َل ِد ِمن إِصبـه ِ‬
       ‫ان‬ ‫ْ ْ ََ‬                       ‫ْ َ‬



                      ‫ِه ــي بِـْنــت ٱلْ ــعِ ــر ِاق بِـْنــت إِمـ ِ‬
                 ‫ـامــي‬      ‫ُ َ‬                 ‫َ ُ َ‬
       ‫وأَنَـ ـ ـ ــا ِض ـ ــدُّه ـ ــا س ــلِـ ـي ــل يََـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬      ‫َ َ ُ‬                                         ‫َ‬



                     ‫ـادِت أ َْو َِسـ ْـعــتُـ ْـم‬
                                               ‫َهـ ْـل َرأَيْــتُـ ْـم يـَـا َس ـ َ‬
       ‫ـط َي ــتَ ـ ِـم ــع ـ ِ‬                      ‫أ َّ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬ ‫َن ض ـ ـ َّـد يْـ ـ ـ ِن قَـ ـ ُّ ْ َ‬



‫]‪[20‬‬               ‫لَـ ـ ـ ْـو تـَـ ـ ـ ـ َـرانَـ ـ ـ ــا بِـ ـ ـ َـر َام ـ ـ ـ ٍـة ن ـَ ـ ـتـَـ ـ َـع ـ ــا َط‬
       ‫أَ ْكـ ــؤسـ ــا لِ ـ ْل ــه ــوى بِ ــغَ ـ ِـر بـ ــنَ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬     ‫ْ َ‬                     ‫ََ‬                       ‫ًُ‬



                 ‫ـوق َحـ ِـديــثًــا‬ ‫ـس ـ ُ‬     ‫َوٱ ْلـَ ـ ـ َـوى ب ـَـي ـْ ـنـَــنَ ــا يَـ ُ‬
       ‫طَـ ـيِّ ــب ــا م ـ ـطْـ ـ ِربـ ــا بِـ ــغَ ـ ـ ِـر لِ ــس ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬ ‫ْ َ‬                         ‫ً ُ ً‬



                           ‫ـب ٱلْـ َـع ـ ْق ـ ُـل فِـيـ ِـه‬
                                                         ‫لَ ـ َـرأَيـْــتُ ـ ْـم َم ــا يَـ ـ ْذ َه ـ ُ‬
       ‫اق مـ ــعـ ــتَـ ــنِ ـ ـ َقـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬                                             ‫ِ‬
                               ‫يََـ ـ ـ ـ ٌـن َوٱلْـ ـ ـ ـ ــعـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـر ُ ُ ْ‬


‫‪84‬‬
For the daughter of kings,
   of Persian shahs,
of the city of cities,
   Isfahân


For a daughter of Irâq,
   my master’s child
and I, of Yemen,
   her foil


Did you know, my lords,
   have you heard
that contraries could
   ever be joined?


Had you only seen us                        [20]
   in Râma trading
passion’s chalice—
   not moving a hand


As love sang
   a rapture song
between us
   without a sound


You’d have seen
   what melts the mind—
Irâq and Yemen
   intertwined!


                             In a Bad Way    85
                    ‫ال قـَْبلِي‬     ‫َّاع ُر ٱ لَّـ ِـذ ي قَ َ‬
                                                           ‫َكـ َذ ب ٱلش ِ‬
                                                                   ‫َ‬
       ‫ـج ــا ِر َع ـ ْق ــلِـ ِـه قَـ ـ ْد َرَمـ ـ ِـان‬‫ـ‬ ‫َح‬
                                                      ‫َ ْ َ‬‫أ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                               ‫ـ‬‫ب‬‫و‬



                                                                 ‫ِ‬
                                                             ‫أَيـُّـ َـه ــا ٱلْـ ُـم ـْن ــك ـ ُ‬
                       ‫ـح ٱلـ ـثـُّـ َـريَّــا ُسـ َـهـ ْـي ـاً‬
       ‫ع ــم ــرَك ٱل ـلَّــه َك ــي ــف يـ ـ ْلــتَـ ِـقــيـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬ ‫ُ ْ َ َ َ‬                                          ‫ََْ‬



                                                                ‫ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[25‬‬                                  ‫هـ ـ َـي َش ــام ـيَّ ـةٌ إِ َذ ا َم ــا ْ‬
                     ‫ٱس ـتـَـ َق ـلَّـ ْ‬
                    ‫ـت‬
       ‫وسـ ــهـ ــيـ ــل إِ َذ ا ٱسـ ـتـ ـ َق ـ َّـل يََـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـان‬                       ‫ْ‬          ‫ََُْ ٌ‬




‫‪86‬‬
The poet who
   coined these verses
lied, pelting me
   with logic’s stones


O you who’d match
   Suháyl with the Pleiades
God grant you life,
   how can they meet?


As the Pleiades ascend                       [25]
   in the Syrian East
Suháyl rises south
   southwest, in Yemen




                              In a Bad Way    87
                                                                                            ‫‪21‬‬




            ‫ٱلِـ َـمــى‬
                     ‫ـب َربَّـ ـةَ ْ‬     ‫ِ ِ‬
                                                                   ‫أَيَــا َرْو َ‬
                                    ‫ضـ ـ ـةَ ٱلْ ـ ـ َـوادي أَجـ ـ ْ‬
        ‫ِ‬
      ‫ضةَ ٱ لْ َواد ي‬                                 ‫َو َذ َ‬
                     ‫ات ٱلثـَّنَايَا ٱ لْغُِّريَا َرْو َ‬



                                      ‫ِ‬
            ‫ـاعـ ـةً‬
                 ‫ـك َس ـ َ‬ ‫َوظَـ ـ ـلِّ ـ ـ ْـل َعـ ـلَـ ـيـْـ َـه ــا ِم ـ ـ ْـن ِظ ـ ـ َـال ـ ـ َ‬
        ‫قَــلِـي ـاً إِ َل أَ ْن يــســتـ ِـقـ َّـر ِب ــا ا ل ـنَّـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد ي‬            ‫َ َْ َ‬



             ‫ـام ـ َـه ــا‬     ‫وتـ ـ ـْنـ ــصـ ــب بِ ـ ـ ْـٱلَج ـ ــوا ِز ِمـ ـْن ـ َ ِ‬
                       ‫ـك خ ــيَـ ُ‬              ‫ْ َ‬                 ‫َُ َ َ‬
      ‫فَــمــا ِشـ ْـئــت ِم ــن طَــل ِغـ ـ َذاء لِــمـْنـ ِ‬
      ‫ـآد‬   ‫ً ُ‬                 ‫َ ْ ٍّ‬                            ‫َ‬



             ‫ت ِم ْن نَ ًد ى‬         ‫ِ‬
                             ‫ت م ْن َوبْ ٍل َوَما شْئ َ‬
                                                        ‫وما ِشْئ ِ‬
                                                          ‫َ‬     ‫ََ‬
                           ‫س ــح ــاب ع ـلَــى ب ــانَـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاتَــا رائِـ ــح َغ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد‬    ‫َ ٌ‬                   ‫َ َ ٌ َ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬              ‫ـت ِم ـ ْـن ِظ ـ ٍّـل ظَــلِـيـ ٍـل َوِمـ ـ ْـن َجـ ًـى‬        ‫ِ‬
                                                                      ‫َوَم ــا ش ـ ْـئ ـ َ‬
      ‫ٱل ـ ـ ِـان َيِـ ـي ــس ِبـ ـيَّ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد‬     ‫ُ َ‬                       ‫َشـ ـ ِه ـ ٍّـي لَـ ـ َـدى َْ‬




‫‪88‬‬
Your Wish




O garden of the riverbed
respond to the lady
of this hallowed ground,
she with the flashing


Smile   Cover her
in shade for a while
until the assembly
gathers by her side


And their tents nestle
along the banks
Then dew and rain
will moisten branches


As they sway
Mists will shroud
the moringa tree
at dawn and eve


Then the shade                         [5]
will start to deepen
from boughs laden
low with fruits




                           Your Wish   89
                      ‫ود َوَرْملَ َها‬          ‫ِ ٍِ ِ‬
                                   ‫َوم ْن نَاشد ف َيها َزُر َ‬
     ‫اد وِمن مْن ِش ٍد ه ِ‬
     ‫اد‬                     ‫ِ ٍِ ٍ‬
        ‫َ‬        ‫َوم ْن ُمْنشد َح َ ْ ُ‬




‫‪90‬‬
For pilgrims seeking
the sands of Zarūd,
flanked by the chants
of drivers and guides




                        Your Wish   91
                                                                                                                          ‫‪22‬‬




                        ‫ـب َْن ـ َـو ب ـُ ْـرقَـ ِـة ث ـَ ْـهـ َـمـ ِـد‬
                                                                     ‫عُـ ْـج بِــٱلـ َّـرَكــائِـ ِ‬
        ‫ٱلروض الن ِ‬
      ‫َّد ي‬                                              ‫حي ُ ِ‬
                        ‫ٱلرطْ ُ‬
              ‫ب َو َّ ْ ُ‬         ‫يب َّ‬    ‫ث ٱ لْ َقض ُ‬               ‫َْ‬



                                       ‫يض َها‬ ‫وق ِبا تُِر َ ِ‬
                                           ‫يك َوم َ‬                        ‫َحْي ُ‬
                                                             ‫ث ٱ لْبـُُر ُ َ‬
       ‫ِ‬
      ‫وح َويـَـ ْغ ــتَــدي‬                ‫ِ‬
                                             ‫ـح ـ ُ‬
                         ‫ـاب بَــا ي ـَـ ـ ُـر ُ‬     ‫ـث ٱل ـ َّ‬
                                                 ‫ـس ـ َ‬       ‫َح ـ ْـي ـ ُ‬



                                            ‫ٱلسح ِي من ِ‬
                                        ‫اد يًا‬ ‫ـك بِ ُّ َ ْ َُ‬    ‫صـ َـوي ـْـتَـ َ‬‫َو ْٱرفَـ ْـع ُ‬
      ‫ـان الـ ـنـ ـ َّـه ــدِ‬
                          ‫ٱلِ ـ ــس ـ ـ ِ‬    ‫ِ‬   ‫ِ‬          ‫بِ ــٱلْـ ـبِـ ـي ـ ِ‬
                 ‫ُ‬              ‫ـض َوٱلْ ـ ــغـ ـ ـي ـ ــد ْ َ‬



                                                                                          ‫ٍ‬                    ‫ِ ٍ‬                ‫ِ‬
                                                             ‫َح ـ ـ َـوٍر‬   ‫م ـ ْـن ُك ـ ِّـل فَــات ـك ــة بِـ ـطَ ـ ْـرف أ ْ‬
      ‫ِمـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْـن ُكـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِّـل َلفِ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــتَ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍـة ِِبـ ـ ـ ـ ـي ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍـد أَ ْغ ـ ـ ـ ــيَ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـد‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                                             ‫ـب َهــائِـ ٍم‬ ‫ـصـ ُـد ُكـ َّـل ق ـَْلـ ٍ‬‫ت ــهــوى ف ـت ـ ْقـ ِ‬
                                                                                                   ‫َْ َ َُ‬
      ‫اشـ ـ ـ ٍـق َوُمـ ـ َـه ـ ـنَّـ ـ ِـد‬
                                         ‫ٱلِـ ـ ــسـ ـ ــا َن بِـ ـ ــر ِ‬
                                            ‫َ‬                  ‫َ‬       ‫ْ‬      ‫ى‬  ‫ـو‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬
                                                                                  ‫َْ َ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـه‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ي‬




‫‪92‬‬
Blacksilver




Turn toward the hard
rock plain of Tháhmad
where willows and meadows
   are moist with dew


Where lightning flickers
before you and clouds
come early and
   by dusk are gone


Lift your voice
at the break of dawn
and call to each radiant
   lissome girl


Fatal the blacksilver
flash of her eyes,
gentle the bend
   of her neck as she turns


She hunts after                             [5]
the heart-­dazed lover
laying him low
   with a glance of steel




                              Blacksilver   93
                                 ‫ـس ُم ـن ـَ َّـع ـ ٍم‬
                                                    ‫ِّم ـ ْقـ ِ‬
                                                            ‫ـص َكــٱلــد َ‬ ‫ت ـَ ْـع ـطُــو بِـ َـر ْخ ـ ٍ‬
       ‫ـك ٱلْ ـ َف ــتِ ـي ـ ِـق ُم ـ َق ـ ْـرَم ـ ِـد‬
                                                    ‫بِــٱل ـنَّـ ِّـد وٱلْ ـ ِـم ــس ـ ِ‬
                                                        ‫َ ْ‬



                              ‫ت ـ ــرنـُ ــو إِ َذ ا َلـ ـظَ ــت ِبـ ـ ْقـ ـلَ ـ ِـة ش ـ ـ ِ‬
                          ‫ـاد ٍن‬     ‫َ‬                    ‫َ ْ ُ‬                         ‫َْ‬
       ‫ٱل ْثِـ ـ ــدِ‬
                   ‫ي ـُ ـ ْـع ـ ـ َـزى لِـ ُـم ـ ْق ـلَ ــت ـ َـه ــا َس ـ ـ ــو ُاد ِْ‬
                                               ‫ِ‬
                          ‫َ‬



                                                      ‫ـســح ـ ِر ٱلْـ َقــتُـ ِ‬
                                ‫ـحـ ٍـل‬
                                     ‫ـول ُمـ َكـ َّ‬                       ‫بِــٱلْــغُـْنـ ِـج َوٱلـ ِّ ْ‬
       ‫ٱلُـ ـ ْـس ـ ـ ِن ٱلْ ــبَ ـ ِـديـ ـ ِع ُم ـ َق ـلَّـ ِـد‬
                                                              ‫بِــٱل ـتِّ ـي ـ ِـه َو ْ‬



                          ‫َهيـَْفاءُ َما تـَْه َوى ٱ لَّ ِذ ي أ َْه َوى َوَل‬
       ‫ص ْد ِق ٱ لْ َم ْو ِع ِد‬
                              ‫ت بِ ِ‬               ‫تَ ِ ِ ِ‬
                                   ‫ف للَّذ ي َو َع َد ْ‬



                      ‫َس ـ َـو ًدا‬                                   ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[10‬‬                                    ‫ـجـ ً‬
                                ‫ـاعــا أ ْ‬                                 ‫ـحــبَـ ْ‬
                                              ‫ـت َغــديـ َـرت ـَ َـهــا ُشـ َ‬     ‫َسـ َ‬
       ‫لِــتـ ِـخـيــف م ــن ي ـ ْق ـ ُفــو بِـ ـ َذ َاك ْٱلَس ــودِ‬
         ‫َْ‬                                ‫ُ َ َْ َ‬



                          ‫ـت ٱلْ ـ َـم ــنُ ــو َن َوإَِّنَـ ــا‬        ‫ِ ِ‬
                                                              ‫َوٱل ـ ـلَّـ ــه َم ــا خـ ـ ْف ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـوت ف ـ َـا أ ََر َاهـ ـ ــا ِف َغ ـ ِـد‬  ‫َخـ ـ ـ ْـوِف أ َُم ـ ـ ـ ُ‬


‫‪94‬‬
She extends you a hand
soft as undyed silk
anointed with
   ambergris and musk


She casts you the gaze
of a fawn gazelle
a glint of obsidian
   in her eyes


A collyrium of spells
across her brow,
neckline ablaze
   with beauty unheard


How slender she is,
not loving as I
do, nor true
   to her vow


She lets down her hair’s                 [10]
black coils to
fix with dread
   one who’d track her


It isn’t by God
my death I fear
but to die and
   never see her


                           Blacksilver    95
                                                                                     ‫‪23‬‬




                          ‫اخوا بَِو ِاد ي ٱ لْ َع ِق ِيق‬    ‫ُس َحيـًْرا أَنَ ُ‬
             ‫ِ‬
      ‫َوقَـ ـ ْد قَـطَــعُ ـوا ُك ـ َّـل فَ ـ ٍّـج َعــمـيـ ِـق‬



                            ‫ـج ـ ُـر إِ َّل َوقَـ ـ ْد‬
                                                    ‫فَـ َـم ــا طَ ـلَ ـ َـع ٱ لْ ـ َف ـ ْ‬
            ‫ِ‬                         ‫ِ‬
      ‫َرأ َْوا َعـلَـ ًـمــا َل ئ ـح ـاً ف ـَ ـ ْـو َق نـيـ ِـق‬



                ‫إِ َذ ا َر َامـ ــهُ ٱ ل ـنَّـ ْـسـ ُـر َلْ يـَ ْـســتَـ ِـطـ ْـع‬
      ‫فَ ِمن د ونِِه كا َن بـيض ْٱلَنُ ِ‬
      ‫وق‬       ‫َْ ُ‬                       ‫ْ ُ‬



                     ‫ـوشـ ـةٌ‬
                          ‫ف َمـ ـن ـْ ـ ُق ـ َ‬ ‫َع ـ ـلَـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ِـه َز َخـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا ِر ُ‬
      ‫اعـ ِـد ِم ـثْــل ٱلْــعـ ُقـ ِ‬
      ‫ـوق‬                          ‫وثِـيــق ٱلْ ـ َقــو ِ‬
             ‫ُ َ‬                       ‫َ ُ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                ‫َس ـطُـ ًـرا أ َْو َدعُ ـ َ‬
               ‫ـوه ــا‬                      ‫َوقَـ ـ ْد َكــتَــبُـوا أ ْ‬
      ‫يب م ُشوقِ‬                  ‫ِ‬
            ‫ب َغ ِر ٍ َ‬  ‫ص ٍّ‬‫أ ََل َمـ ْـن ل َ‬




‫‪96‬‬
Blaze




By dawn’s edge they’d cut
   through every ravine
to kneel their camels
   in Wādilaqīq


At first pale light
   it appeared
high above them
   on a mountain peak


It towers beyond
   the eagle’s glide,
cliff-­buzzard’s eggs
   nestled in its shadows


On great foundations
   it rises heavenward,
decked and blazoned
   like Castle ʿAqūq


On its walls they carved             [5]
   a tale for the telling
and left it: Pity
   the love-­lost stranger




                             Blaze   97
                                 ‫ـســمـ ِ‬
                                ‫ـاك‬                                          ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫لَ ــهُ هَّـ ـةٌ فَـ ـ ْـو َق ٰهـ ـ َذا ٱلـ ِّ َ‬
       ‫ٱلَـ ـ ِريـ ـ ِـق‬                 ‫َويُـ ــوطَ ـ ـأُ بِـ ـ ْ‬
                                  ‫ـٱلُـ ـ ِّ‬
                      ‫ـف َو ْط ءَ ْ‬



                             ‫ومــسـ َكــنُــهُ ِعـْنـ َـد ٰه ـ َذا ٱلْــعـ َقـ ِ‬
                            ‫ـاب‬     ‫ُ‬                                      ‫ََ ْ‬
       ‫ت ٱ لْغَ ِر ِيق‬ ‫و‬ ‫م‬
                     ‫ْ َْ َ‬‫ع‬
                           ‫ِ‬ ‫م‬ ‫َّ‬
                               ‫ٱلد‬    ‫ف‬  ‫ِ‬ ‫ات‬      ‫م‬
                                            ‫َ َْ َ َ‬   ‫د‬   ‫ق‬ ‫و‬



                                               ‫ـب لِْلح ِ‬
                                          ‫اد ثَ ِ‬
                                         ‫ات‬        ‫ٱلُـ ُّ َ‬         ‫ٱسلَ َمهُ ْ‬    ‫قَـ َـد ْ‬
                 ‫ِ‬                      ‫ِ‬  ‫ِ‬                                      ‫ِ‬
       ‫بٰـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َذا ٱلْ ـ ـ َـم ـ ـك ـ ــان ب ـ ــغَ ـ ـ ِْـر َش ــقـ ـي ـ ِـق‬



                                        ‫ـب‬‫ـاه ٱلْ ـ َقــلِ ـيـ ِ‬         ‫ِ ِ‬
                                                                ‫فـَــيَ ــا َوا ِردي ـ ـ ـ َـن م ــيَ ـ َ‬
       ‫ـن بِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـو ِادي ٱلْ ـ َـع ـ ِـق ـي ـ ِـق‬   ‫ِِ‬
                                                     ‫َويَـ ـ ــا َسـ ــاكـ ــنـ ـ َ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                                           ‫َويـَ ـ ـ ـ ــا طَـ ــالِـ ــبً ـ ــا طَـ ـ ْـي ـ ــبَـ ـ ـةً َزائِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ًـرا‬
       ‫ـن ِبٰـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َذا ٱل ـ ـطَّـ ـ ِريـ ـ ِـق‬              ‫ِ ِ‬
                                                          ‫َويَـ ـ ـ ــا َس ـ ــال ـ ــك ـ ـ َ‬


                                  ‫أَفِـ ـيـ ـ ُقـ ـوا َعـ ـلَـ ـيـْــنَ ــا فَـ ـِإنـَّ ــا ُرِزيـ ــنَـ ــا‬
       ‫ـش ــر ِ‬                              ‫ـس ـ َ ِ‬
       ‫وق‬ ‫ـح ـ ْـر ق ـُـبـَـ ْـي ـ َـل ٱل ـ ُّ ُ‬      ‫بـ ـُ َـع ـ ْـي ـ َـد ٱل ـ ُّ‬
                                      ‫ـضـ ــاءَ َغـ ـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ـ َـداءَ بـَـ ْـه ــنَ ــانَ ـ ٍـة‬
                                                                                               ‫بِـ ـب ـَ ـ ْـيـ ـ َ‬
       ‫ـك فَــتِـ ـي ـ ِـق‬
                        ‫ـضـ ـ ـ َّـوعُ نَ ـ ـ ْش ـ ــرا َكـ ـ ِـمـ ــسـ ـ ٍ‬
                             ‫ْ‬                   ‫ً‬                             ‫تَـ ـ ـ َ‬
‫‪98‬‬
Who reached past Arcturus
   then was ground
underfoot like
   an ember


Who staked his home
   in Aquila’s stars,
then sank drowning
   through his tears


Here in this place
   love turned him over
without a friend
   to the twisting fates


You who come down
   to Old Well,
you who find home
   in Wādilaqīq


You who search                      [10]
   for sweet Medina,
you treading this
   same hard ground


Revive me! Dawn
   then dusk and I


was robbed of a tender
   fragrant beauty

                            Blaze    99
                                         ‫تََايل سكْرى َك ِمثْ ِل ٱ لْغُص ِ‬
                                        ‫ون‬    ‫ُ‬                                        ‫ََ َ َ‬
       ‫ـشـ ِـق ـيـ ِـق‬
                    ‫ـاح َك ـ ِـم ـثْ ـ ِـل ٱلـ َّ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬
                                                     ‫ـر‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                                              ‫َ َ ْ َ ِّ َ ُ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـا‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـه‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ت‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ـن‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ث‬


                                                ‫ـص ٱلـن ـََّقــا‬‫ـول َكـ ِـد ْعـ ِ‬       ‫ف مــهـ ٍ‬   ‫ٍ‬
                                                                                                 ‫بِ ـ ِرْد َ ُ‬
       ‫تـَـ ـ ـ َـر ْج ـ ـ ـ َـر ُج ِمـ ـ ـثْ ـ ـ َـل َس ـ ــنَ ـ ـ ِـام ٱلْـ ـ َف ــنِـ ـي ـ ِـق‬



‫]‪[15‬‬                                ‫ول‬‫فَـ َـمــا َل َم ـ ِـي ِف َهـ َـو َاهــا َع ـ ُذ ٌ‬
       ‫صـ ـ ِـد يـ ـ ِـق‬       ‫َوَل َل َم ـ ـ ـ ِـي ِف َه ـ ـ َـو َ‬
                       ‫اه ـ ــا َ‬
                                                  ‫ول‬‫َولَـ ْـو َل َم ـ ِـي ِف َهـ َـو َاهــا َع ـ ُذ ٌ‬
       ‫لَـ ـ ـك ـ ــا َن َجـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـو ِاب إِلَـ ـ ـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ـ ـ ِـه َشـ ـ ِهـ ـي ـ ِـق‬

                              ‫ـشــوقِــي ِرَكـ ِـاب وح ــزِن لِب ِ‬
                             ‫اسي‬ ‫َ ُْ َ‬                      ‫فَـ َ ْ‬
                                ‫ووج ـ ِـدي صــبـ ِ‬
       ‫ـوحــي ودمــعِــي َغــبــوقِ‬
           ‫ُ‬             ‫ََْ‬       ‫َُ‬          ‫ََ ْ‬




‫‪100‬‬
She sways tipsy
  as a willow touched
by the wind, as anemone
  petals part silken


With a sway of the hips
  like the sway of a dune
or the hump of a camel mare
  ambling in the haze


If you shame me, scold,               [15]
  for loving her,


if you shame me, friend,
  I’ll answer with a gasp


Longing’s my mount
  solitude’s my mantle,
my dawn wine’s delirium,
  tears are for dusk




                              Blaze   101
                                                                                                                     ‫‪24‬‬



                                                           ‫ِ‬
                                      ‫َع ِر ُ‬
          ‫ف لَهُ أَخاً َو ُه َو ٰه َذ ا‬                                   ‫ال َوٱ نْ َش َدِن بـَْع ُ‬
                                           ‫ض ٱ لْ ُف َقَراء بـَْيتًا َل أ ْ‬                      ‫َوقَ َ‬


                                                                  ‫ك قَ ِ‬
                                                              ‫اط ًفا‬     ‫َعه ِد ي بِِثْلِي ِعْن َد بانِ ِ‬
                                                                              ‫َ‬                       ‫ْ‬
                                                                             ‫َثَر ٱلْ ُق ُد ِ‬
                                                             ‫ود َوَوْرَد َرْو ٍ‬
                                                  ‫ض أَيـْنَ ِع‬                           ‫َ‬


                               ‫ت أَبـْيَا تًا ِف ٰه َذ ا َّ‬
                        ‫ٱلر ِو ِّ‬                                 ‫ِ‬
      ‫ض َّمْنتـَُها‬
                  ‫ى َو َ‬                                    ‫ت َم ْعنَاهُ فـََعم ْل ُ‬‫َع َجبَِن َوقـََف ْو ُ‬  ‫فَأ ْ‬
                                           ‫ِ ِ‬               ‫ِ ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬
                  ‫ت‪:‬‬                                       ‫ت بِ َك َمال ِه إِ َجابَةً ل ٰذ ل َ‬
                    ‫ك ٱ لْ َفق ِري َرحَهُ ٱللَّهُ فـَُق ْل ُ‬                                   ‫ٰه َذ ا ٱ لْبـَْي َ‬


                                                                               ‫ول ٱلدَّا ِرس ِ‬
                                                                  ‫ات بِلَ ْعلَ ِع‬               ‫ف بِٱلطُّلُ ِ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                                                     ‫َ‬                      ‫ق ْ‬
                                                  ‫اك ٱ لْبـَْل َق ِع‬                 ‫وٱ نْ ُد ب أ ِ‬
                                                                    ‫َحبَّتـَنَا بِ َذ َ‬  ‫َ ْ‬



                                                                ‫ـجــبًــا‬                    ‫قِــف بِــٱلــدِّيــا ِر ونـَ ِ‬
                                                                       ‫ـاد َهــا ُمـت ـَ َـعـ ِّ‬  ‫َ َ‬                  ‫ْ‬
                                                  ‫ف بِتـََف ُّج ِع‬    ‫ِمنـها ِبس ِن تـلَطُّ ٍ‬
                                                                                  ‫َْ ُ ْ َ‬



                                                                  ‫ك قَ ِ‬
                                                              ‫اط ًفا‬     ‫َعه ِد ي بِِثْلِي ِعْن َد بانِ ِ‬
                                                                              ‫َ‬                       ‫ْ‬
                                                                             ‫َثَر ٱلْ ُق ُد ِ‬
                                                             ‫ود َوَوْرَد َرْو ٍ‬
                                                  ‫ض أَيـْنَ ِع‬                           ‫َ‬



‫‪102‬‬
Stay Now




A dervish recited a verse to me, the likes of which I’d never heard.


All who sought you
you showered with graces
Only for me did your
lightning flash faithless


It struck me and I followed its trail. I’ve composed verses using his
rhyme, quoting his verse in full, as a response to that dervish, God rest
his soul.


Stay at the ruins
in Láʿlaʿi fading,
and in that wilderness
grieve for those we loved


And at that campsite
call out her name,
your heart softly
torn away


O for the times
passed near her moringa,
picking her fruit,
her garden’s red rose




                                                             Stay Now   103
                                        ‫ُكـ ُّـل ٱلَّـ ِـذي ي ــرجــو ن ــوالَـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـك أ ُْمـ ِـطـ ُـروا‬     ‫َْ ُ َ َ‬
      ‫ـك ُخ ـلَّــبًــا إَِّل َمــعِــي‬‫م ــا ك ــا َن بـ ــرقُ ـ ِ‬
                                             ‫َْ‬                  ‫َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                                 ‫ت نـََع ْم قَ ْد َكا َن َذ َ‬
                  ‫اك ٱ لْ ُم ْلتـََقى‬                          ‫قَا لَ ْ‬
           ‫ِ‬      ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
        ‫صب َم ْوض ِع‬ ‫َخ َ‬   ‫ِف ظ ِّل أَفـْنَ ِان بأ ْ‬



                                 ‫وق مــبـ ِ‬
                            ‫ـاسـ ٍم‬            ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
                                    ‫إ ْذ َكــا َن ب ـَ ْـرقــي مـ ْـن بـُـ ُـر َ َ‬
      ‫َوٱلْ ـيـَـ ْـوَم ب ـَ ْـرقِــي لَـ ْـمـ ُـع ٰه ـ َذا ٱلْـي ـَ ْـرَم ـ ِع‬



                            ‫ـب َزَم ــانًــا َم ــا لَــنَــا ِم ـ ْـن ِحـيـلَـ ٍـة‬     ‫فَـ ْ‬
                                                                                 ‫ـٱعــتُـ ْ‬
      ‫ـب َم ـْن ـ ِزِل لَـ ْـع ـلَـ ِع‬                     ‫ِ ِِ‬
                                        ‫ف َد فْ ــع ــه َم ــا َذ نْـ ـ ُ‬



               ‫ـت َك ـ َـا َم ـ َـه ــا‬        ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫فـَـ َـعـ ـ َذ ْرتـُـ َـه ــا لَـ َّـم ــا َس ـ ْـع ـ ُ‬
      ‫وج ِع‬   ‫تَ ْش ُكو َكما أَ ْش ُكو بَِق ْل ٍ‬
         ‫ب ُم َ‬                             ‫َ‬



                     ‫ـوع ـ َـه ــا‬     ‫َو َسـ ـأَلْـ ـتـُـ َـه ــا لَـ َّـم ــا َرأَيْـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
                               ‫ـت ُربُـ َ‬
                    ‫ـاح ٱلـ َّـذا ِريـ ِ‬
      ‫ـات ْٱل َْربَـ ِع‬                ‫َمـ ْـسـ َـرى ٱلـ ِّـريَـ ِ‬
                         ‫َ‬


‫‪104‬‬
All who sought you
you showered with graces
Only for me did your
lightning flash faithless


We used, she said,                     [5]
to come there together
in my branches’ shadows
in that lush land


My lightning, once
a smile’s flash,
is now a blaze
of barren stone


Blame time
relentless time!
What fault was it
of Láʿlaʿi?


I forgave her
as I heard her speak
grieving as I grieved
with wounded heart


I asked her when
I saw her meadows
pastures of the
scouring winds—


                            Stay Now   105
‫]‪[10‬‬                 ‫ـاح ـ ُـه ـ ْـم ِبـَ ِـق ـيــلِـ ِهـ ْـم‬      ‫ِ‬
                                                          ‫َخـ ـبـَـ َـرتْ ــك ِريَـ ُ‬
                                                                                   ‫َه ـ ْـل أ ْ‬
                         ‫ِ‬
               ‫ـت ن ـَ َـعـ ْـم قَــالـ ُـوا بِـ َذات ْٱل ْ‬
       ‫َج ـ َـرِع‬                                                 ‫قَــالَـ ْ‬



                   ‫يض تُ ْش ِر ُق بِٱ لَّ ِذ ي‬
                                            ‫ام ٱ لْبِ ُ‬
                                                             ‫ث ِْ‬
                                                        ‫ٱليَ ُ‬  ‫َحْي ُ‬
       ‫وس ٱلطُّلَّ ِع‬
                   ‫ُّم ِ‬
                       ‫ك ٱلش ُ‬       ‫َْت ِو ِيه ِم ْن تِْل َ‬




‫‪106‬‬
Did they tell you where              [10]
they’d rest at noon
Yes, she said,
at Sand Hill


Where white tents glow
from the light of
all those suns
ablaze within




                          Stay Now   107
                                                                                                 ‫‪25‬‬




                          ‫َوا َح ـ َـربَــا ِم ـ ْـن َكـ ـبِ ـ ِـد ي َوا َح ـ َـربَــا‬
      ‫َوا طَـ َـربَــا ِم ـ ْـن َخ ـلَـ ِـد ي َوا طَـ َـربـَـا‬
                                                                          ‫ِِ‬
                         ‫ـار َجـ ـ ـ ًـوى ُْم ـ ـ ِرقَـ ـةٌ‬  ‫ِف َك ـ ـبـ ــد ي نَـ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ِف َخلَ ِد ي بَ ْد ُر ُد ًجى قَ ْد َغَربَا‬

                          ‫ص َن نـًَقا‬     ‫ك يَا بَ ْد ُر ويَا غُ ْ‬        ‫يَا ِم ْس ُ‬
      ‫َم ــا أ َْوَرقَ ـ ــا َم ــا أَن ـ ـ َـوَرا َم ــا أَطْــيَــبَــا‬

                                    ‫ـت ِم ـْنــهُ ْ‬
                        ‫ٱلَــبَــبَــا‬                                    ‫ِ‬
                                                  ‫يَــا َمـ ْـبــسـ ًـمــا أَحــبَـ ْـبـ ُ‬
                ‫ـت ِمـْنــهُ ٱلـ َّ‬
      ‫ـضـ َـربَــا‬                                    ‫ويـَـا ُر َ‬
                                     ‫ضــابـًـا ذُقْ ـ ُ‬
                                                 ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                                ‫يَــا قَ ـ َـم ـ ًـرا ِف َش ـ َف ـ ٍـق مـ ـ ْـن َخـ َ‬
                              ‫ـجـ ٍـل‬
      ‫ِف َخـ ـ ـ ـ ِّـد ِه الَ َح لَ ــنَ ــا ُم ـْن ــتَـ ِـق ــبَــا‬

                      ‫لَ ـ ـ ْـو أَنَّـ ـ ــهُ يـُ ـ ْـسـ ـ ِـفـ ـ ُـر َع ـ ـ ْـن ب ـُـ ْـرقُـ ــعِـ ـ ِـه‬
      ‫ـجــبَــا‬                         ‫ِ‬
                    ‫َك ــا َن َع ـ َذابًــا فَــل ـ ٰـه ـ َذا ْ‬
             ‫ٱحــتَـ َ‬
                   ‫طَــالِـ َـع ـةٌ‬           ‫ضــحــى ِف فـ ـلَـ ٍ‬
                                              ‫ـك‬    ‫َ‬              ‫َشْ ـ ُ‬
                                                              ‫ـس ُ ً‬
         ‫ض ٍة قَ ْد نُ ِ‬
      ‫صبَا‬                                    ‫ص ُن نـًَقى ِف‬
                          ‫َرْو َ‬                           ‫غُ ْ‬
                      ‫ـت َلـَ ــا ِمـ ـ ْـن َحـ ـ ـ َذ ٍر ُم ـ ْـرتَـ ِـق ــبًــا‬        ‫ِ‬
                                                                               ‫ظـ ـ ْل ـ ُ‬
      ‫صـيِّــبَــا‬                  ‫وٱلْــغُــص ــن أ ِ ِ‬
                 ‫َســق ـي ــه َسَـ ــاءً َ‬     ‫َ ُْ ْ‬
                                                    ‫إِ ْن طَـلَــعــت َكــا نـَ ِ‬
                                ‫ـت لـ َـعـ ْـيـ ِـي َعـ َ‬
                         ‫ـجــبًــا‬                      ‫ْ‬               ‫َ ْ‬
                               ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـت لَـ ْـيـ ِـي َســبَــبَــا‬  ‫ـت َكــا نـَ ْ‬   ‫أ َْو َغـ َـربَـ ْ‬


‫‪108‬‬
Vanished




Deep are the wounds and the rapture sharp
Love has ravaged me to the marrow


Yet by night a full moon shines
within my soul—musk and moon


And a branch on a dune,
so green and clear, so fragrant!


O how I loved the luster of his smile,
the nectar tasted in his kiss


A pale moon in sunset glow                             [5]
on his cheek from behind a veil


Had he lowered the veil, he’d
have sharpened the pain   He let it be


She rose before me like a midday sun,
a branch on a dune become a garden


In fear I kept vigil, watering
that garden with a bursting sky


In wonder I behold her rise,
then, as she sets, I expire




                                            Vanished   109
‫]‪[10‬‬                        ‫ٱلُـ ْـس ـ ُـن َع ـلَــى َم ـ ْف ـ ِرقِـ َـهــا‬
                                                                         ‫ُمـ ـ ْذ َع ـ َق ـ َـد ْ‬
                                       ‫ِ‬                        ‫ِ‬
                           ‫تَــاجـاً مـ َـن ٱلـتِّـ ِْـر َعــشـ ْقـ ُ‬
       ‫ـت ٱلّـ َّـذ َهــبَــا‬

                      ‫آد ٍم‬                   ‫ِ‬                           ‫َّ ِ ِ‬
                             ‫ـس َرأَى م ـ ـ ْـن َ‬                 ‫لَـ ـ ْـو أَن إ بْ ــلـ ـي ـ َ‬
       ‫ـاه ـ ــا َع ـ ـلَـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ِـه َم ـ ــا أ ََب‬             ‫نُـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
                                                   ‫ـور ُمَ ـ ـيَّـ ـ َ‬
                             ‫ـس َرأَى َمــا َرقَ ـ َـم ٱل‬                       ‫َّ ِ ِ‬
                                                                        ‫لَـ ْـو أَن إ ْد ريـ ـ َ‬
       ‫ُح ـ ْـس ـ ُـن خبَـ ـ َّـد ي ـْ ـ َـهـ ــا إِ ًذ ا َمـ ــا َك ــتَــبَــا‬

                         ‫َت َرف ـْ ـ َـرف ـَـ َـهـ ــا‬                     ‫َّ ِ ِ‬
                                                       ‫ـس َرأ ْ‬     ‫لَـ ـ ْـو أَن ب ـ ْل ــق ـي ـ َ‬
       ‫ـصـ ْـر ُح بِبَا‬
                     ‫ش َوَل ٱ لـ َّ‬             ‫َمــا َخطََر ٱ لْـ َـعـ ْـر ُ‬
                         ‫ضا‬                                            ‫ِ‬
                           ‫يَا َس ْرحةَ ٱ لْـ َـواد ي َويَــا بَــا َن ٱ لْغَ َ‬
           ‫أ َْهـ ُـد وا لَنَا ِم ْن نَ ْش ِرُك ْم َم َع َّ‬
       ‫ٱلصبَا‬

‫]‪[15‬‬
                                                          ‫ـسـ ـ ـ ًك ـ ــا ي ـَ ـ ـ ـ ُف ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
                   ‫ـوح َريـَّ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــاهُ لَـ ــنَـ ــا‬                                 ‫ُمَ ـ ـ َّ‬
         ‫ك أ َْو َزْه ِر ُّ‬
       ‫ٱلرَب‬                      ‫ض ِام َ‬        ‫م ْن َزْه ِر أ َْه َ‬
                                                                               ‫ِ‬

                         ‫يَـ ــا بـَ ــانَـ ـةَ ٱلْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـو ِادي أَ ِري ـ ــنَـ ــا ف ـَ ـنـَــنً ــا‬
       ‫ـضــبَــا‬                          ‫ٍ‬
              ‫َعـ ـطَ ــاف َلَــا أ َْو قُـ ُ‬                   ‫ِف لِـ ـ ِ‬
                                                             ‫ن أْ‬
                             ‫ـص ـ ِر ِصــبًــا‬
                                             ‫صــبًــا ُتْـ ـ ِـرُ َع ـ ْـن َع ـ ْ‬
                                                                                ‫ـح َ‬   ‫ِ‬
                                                                                  ‫ري ـ ُ‬
       ‫ِبَـ ـ ـ ــا ِج ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍر أ َْو بِِـ ـ ـ ـ ًـى أ َْو بِـ ـ ُق ــبَ ــا‬

                            ‫ٱلِ َمى‬      ‫أ َْو بِٱلنـََّقى فٱ لْ ُمْن َح َن ِعْن َد ْ‬
       ‫ـث َمـ ـ َـراتـِ ـ ُـع ٱ ل ـظِّــبَــا‬
                                           ‫أ َْو لَـ ْـع ـلَ ـ ٍع َح ـ ْـي ـ ُ‬

                                  ‫ـب َل َعـ َ‬
                           ‫ـجــبًــا‬                  ‫ـج ـ ٌ‬  ‫ـب َل َع ـ َ‬           ‫َل َع ـ َ‬
                                                                                 ‫ـج ـ ٌ‬
       ‫ـاوى ٱلْ ــعُ ـ ُـربَــا‬                                                ‫ِ‬
                                                     ‫م ـ ـ ْـن َعـ ـ ـ ـ َـرِ ٍّ‬
                               ‫ب يـَـ ـت ـَ ـ َـهـ ـ َ‬
‫]‪[20‬‬                         ‫ـت قُـ ْـم ـ ِّـريَ ـةٌ‬
                                                  ‫صـ ـ َـد َحـ ـ ْ‬ ‫يَ ـف ـ َـى إِ َذ ا َم ــا َ‬
       ‫بِـ ـ ـ ْذكـ ـ ـ ِر َمـ ـ ـ ْـن يَ ـ ـه ـ ـ َـواهُ فِـ ـي ـ ِـه طَ ـ َـربَ ــا‬

‫‪110‬‬
Beauty laced the strands of her hair                        [10]
in a gold tiara, gilding my fever

Had Iblīs seen her glow on Adam
he’d ’ve fallen down in prayer

Had Idrīs seen the mark of beauty
on her cheek, he’d ’ve written no more

Had Bilqīs seen her carpet
Sulaymân’s hall would’ve slipped her mind

O sarh tree of the valley, moringa, tamarisk
send your fragrance on the Eastwind

A scent of musk, and a breath                               [15]
of the lowland and highland blossoms

Moringa of the riverbed, show me
a bough or wreath soft as her shoulder

The Eastwind tells of a time made young
at Hājir, Mína, or at Qúba

By the trail-­bend dune not far from Híma,
at Láʿlaʿ where gazelles graze

O do not do not do not wonder
at an Arab flirting with a beauty of the sands

When the turtledove cries lost love—                        [20]
he’s gone

                                                 Vanished   111
                                                                                             ‫‪26‬‬




                            ‫ـن ٱلْـ َـمـ ْـو ِعـ ُـد‬ ‫ـن ْٱلَبْـ ــرق ـَـ ْ ِ‬                   ‫بِـ ِْ‬
                                                                             ‫ـٱل ـ ْـزِع ب ـَ ـ ْ َ‬
      ‫فَـ ـأَنِ ـ ْـخ َرَك ــائـِ ـبـَــنَ ــا فَـ ـ ـ َذ َاك ٱلْـ ـ َـمـ ـ ْـوِرُد‬



                                                     ‫ِ‬                     ‫َل تَـ ـطْـ ـلُ ـ َ َّ‬
                              ‫ـن َوَل تـ ـُ ــنَ ـ ــاد ي ب ـَـ ْـعـ ـ َـد هُ‬
                                                              ‫ِ‬
      ‫يَــا َح ــاج ـ ٌـر يَــا بـَ ـ ــا ِر ٌق يَــا ثَـ ْـه ـ َـم ـ ُـد‬



                            ‫ـس ن ـُ َّـهـ ٌد‬       ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬
                                          ‫ـت أ ََوان ـ ُ‬                             ‫َوٱلَـ َـعـ ْ‬
                                                             ‫ـب َكـ َـمــا لَــعــبَـ ْ‬
                            ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـت ظ ــبَــاءٌ ُش ـ َّـرُد‬      ‫َو ْٱرتَـ ـ ْـع َكـ َـمــا َرتـَـ َـع ـ ْ‬



                                                                                   ‫ٍ‬
                           ‫ـاح ذُبَــا ب ـُ َـه ــا‬‫صـ ـ َ‬ ‫ِف َرْوض ـ ــة َغـ ـنَّــاءَ َ‬
                         ‫َج ـ ــابَـ ــهُ طَـ ـ َـربًـ ــا ُه ـ ــنَ ـ ـ َ‬
      ‫ـاك ُمـ ــغَـ ـ ِّـرُد‬                                            ‫فَـ ـ ـأ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                        ‫اش ـيـ َـهــا َوَر َّق نَـ ِـسـيـ ُـمـ َـهــا‬    ‫رقَّـ ــت حــو ِ‬
                                                                                 ‫َ ْ ََ‬
      ‫ـام ـةُ ت ـَ ْـرعُـ ُـد‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـم‬  ‫ـ‬‫ـغ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ل‬
                                        ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬‫و‬
                          ‫َ َْ ُ َ ْ ُ ُ َ َ َ َ‬‫ق‬ ‫ـر‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬ ‫ـم‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـي‬‫ـ‬‫ـغ‬‫ـ‬‫ل‬
                                                                           ‫ْ‬ ‫ـٱ‬‫ـ‬‫ف‬




‫‪112‬‬
Vintage of Adam




Near the rock plain
   at Trail’s Bend
our camels will kneel
   by home waters


There’s no need to seek
   anywhere after
or call for Bāriq
   Tháhmad or Hājir


Revel like pert-­
   breasted girls
or gazelles that pause
   to graze then wander


While a fly murmurs
   in the meadow
and a songbird trills
   in answer


The garden fringe,                          [5]
   breeze tender,
dark cloud glowing,
   thunder rumbling




                          Vintage of Adam   113
                      ‫َوٱ لْـ َـو ْد ُق يـَْن ِز ُل ِم ْن ِخ َل ِل َس َحا بِِه‬
      ‫َّد‬           ‫ـوع صـ ـ ٍّ ِ ِ ِ‬
      ‫ـب لـ ـ ْل ــف ـ َـراق تـَــبَ ــد ُ‬ ‫َكـ ـ ُـد ُمـ ـ ِ َ‬



                     ‫ب ُسـ َـافَـةَ َخْ ـ ِرَهــا ِبُـ َـمــا ِرَهــا‬
                                                                    ‫َوٱ ْش ـ َـر ْ‬
      ‫ك يـُْن ِش ُد‬ ‫ٍ ِ‬
                  ‫ب َعلَى َغ ِرد ُهنَال َ‬              ‫َوٱ طَْر ْ‬



                                                       ‫ِ‬                ‫ٍ‬
                          ‫ت‬   ‫أخ ـبَـ َـر ْ‬
                                         ‫آد َم ْ‬‫َو ُس ـ َـا فَــة ِف َعـ ْـهــد َ‬
      ‫َعـ ْـن َجـنَّـ ِـة ٱ لْـ َـم ـأْ َوى َحـ ِـد يــثًــا يُ ْسنَ ُد‬



                         ‫ـس ــا َن ثـَـ َف ـ ْل ـن ـَ َـهــا ِم ـ ْـن ِري ـ َقـ ٍـة‬ ‫إِ َّن ِْ‬
                                                                                 ‫ٱل ـ َ‬
               ‫ـاد ِبـَـا َعلَيـْنَا ْ‬
      ‫ٱلـَُّـر ُد‬                         ‫ك َجـ َ‬      ‫َكٱ لْ ِمس ِ‬
                                                               ‫ْ‬




‫‪114‬‬
Rains cascading
  like the tears of a lover
torn apart from
  the one he loves


Drink this ancient
  wine, drink deeply
Let the song’s
  spell take you . . .


Adam’s vintage
  bearing word
down the gener-­
  ations from Eden


This wine, scented
  with musk,
savored on the lips
  of women and girls




                              Vintage of Adam   115
                                                                                                  ‫‪27‬‬




                            ‫ـت ٱلْـ َـع ــتِ ـي ـ ُـق تـ َـعـ َ‬
                           ‫ـال‬                                    ‫يَــا أَيـُّـ َـه ــا ٱلْـ ـبـَـ ْـي ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـور لَـ ـ ُكـ ــم بِـ ـ ُقـ ـلُ ــوبِ ــنَ ــا يـَـ ــتَ ـ ـ َـا َل‬
                                                                      ‫نـُ ـ ـ ـ ٌ‬



                                                                     ‫أَ ْش ـ ُكــو إِلَـ ْـيـ َ‬
                        ‫ـك َم ـ َف ــا ِوزاً قَـ ْد ُجـ ْـبـت ـُ َـهــا‬
      ‫ـت فِـيـ َـهــا أ َْد ُم ــعِ ــي إِ ْر َس ـ ـ َـال‬‫أ َْر َسـ ـ ْل ـ ُ‬



                  ‫اح ـ ٍـة‬
                        ‫ـح َل أ لَـ ـ ُّـذ ب ـ َـر َ‬          ‫أ ُْم ـ ِـس ــي وأ ْ ِ‬
                                                         ‫ُص ـ ـبـ ـ ُ‬ ‫َ‬
      ‫ص ـ َـال‬ ‫ٱل‬
                ‫ْ‬    ‫ـع‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ط‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ق‬‫َ‬‫أ‬‫و‬   ‫ـور‬     ‫ـ‬‫ك‬‫ُ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـب‬‫ـ‬‫ل‬
                                                       ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـل‬  ‫ـ‬  ‫ِ‬
                                                                 ‫َص‬ ‫أ‬
             ‫ُ ُ َ َْ َُ َ‬



                     ‫َضـ َّـر ِبـَـا ٱ لْـ َـو َجــى‬
                                                  ‫ـاق َوإِ ْن أ َ‬‫إِ َّن ٱ لـن ـِّـيَـ َ‬
      ‫ـسـَـرى إِ ْرقَـ َـال‬
                         ‫تَـ ْـسـ ِري َوت ـَْـرقُـ ُـل ِف ٱلّـ ُّ‬



                  ‫ت بِنَا‬    ‫ـار ْ‬                     ‫ٰهـ ِـذ ى ٱلـ ِّـرَكـ ُ ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬
                               ‫ـاب إلَـْـيـ ُكـ ُـم َسـ َ‬
             ‫َشـ ْـوقًــا َوَم ــا ت ـَ ْـر ُج ــو بِـ ـ َذ َاك ِو َ‬
      ‫ص ـ َـال‬




‫‪116‬‬
Old Shrine




To you, old shrine,
   high above,
a light beckons
   from my heart


O the long,
   empty reaches
I’ve crossed, tears
   my messengers


Morning and evening
   I ride without rest
roping dawn to
   dusk to dawn


The camels stride
   through the night,
hoof-­bruised and lame,
   hard-­striding


They bear me to you                    [5]
   in longing, without
desire of ever
   arriving there




                          Old Shrine   117
                    ‫ورَم ــايِ ـاً‬         ‫ِ‬             ‫ـت إِل ـ ْـي ـ َ‬
                                ‫ـك َســبَــاســبًــا َ‬                 ‫قَـطَـ َـعـ ْ‬
      ‫َو ْج ـ ًـدا َوَم ــا تَـ ْشـ ُكــو لِـ ـ َذ َاك َكـ َـا َل‬



                ‫ٱلََوى َوأَنَا ٱ لّ ِذ ى‬    ‫َما تَ ْشتَ ِكى أَ َلَ ْ‬
              ‫أَ ْش ُكو ٱ لْ َك َل َل لََق ْد أَتـَْي ُ‬
      ‫ت ُمَ َال‬




‫‪118‬‬
Through the endless
   reach of sands
they race in a trance
   without complaint


No, I’m the one
   who groans
he’s weary—
   absurd




                        Old Shrine   119
                                                                                     ‫‪28‬‬




                                      ‫ـن ٱلـ ـن ـَّ ـ َق ــا َولَ ـ ْـعـ ـلَـ ـ ِع‬ ‫بـَـ ـ ـ ْ َ‬
      ‫َج ـ ـ َـرِع‬                     ‫ِ‬                       ‫ِ‬
                ‫ظ ــبَ ــاءُ َذ ات ْٱل ْ‬
                                      ‫تـَـ ـ ْـر َع ـ ــى ِبَـ ــا ِف َخَـ ـ ٍر‬
      ‫َخَـ ـ ــائِـ ـ ـ ًـا َوتـَـ ـ ـ ْـرتَـ ـ ــعِ ـ ـ ــي‬

                                     ‫ـت أ َِه ـ ـ ـلَّـ ـ ـةٌ‬
                                                            ‫َم ـ ــا طَـ ـ ـلَ ـ ـ َـع ـ ـ ْ‬
      ‫اك ٱ لْـ َـم ـطْ ـلَ ـ ِع‬         ‫بِـ ـأُفْ ـ ِـق َذ َ‬

                                             ‫إِ َّل َو َد ْد ُ‬
                         ‫ت أَ نَّـ ـ َـه ـ ــا‬
      ‫ِمـ ـ ْـن َح ـ ـ َذ ٍر ملْ تَـطْ ـلُ ـ ِع‬

‫]‪[5‬‬                         ‫ت َل ِم ـ ـ َـع ـ ـةٌ‬
                                                ‫َوَل بَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـد ْ‬
      ‫ِمـ ْـن ب ـَ ْـرق َذ َاك ٱلْـي ـَْـرَمـ ِع‬
                                      ‫ِ‬

                                               ‫إِ َّل ٱ ْش ـتـَـ َـه ـ ْـي ـ ُ‬
                               ‫ـت أَنـَّـ َـه ــا‬
      ‫لِـ ـ َـمـ ــا بِـ ــنَـ ــا ملْ ت ـَ ـ ْل ـ َـمـ ـ ِع‬
                                ‫ي ــا دم ــع ـ ِـي وٱنْــس ـ ِ‬
                           ‫ـك ـِـي‬  ‫َ‬              ‫َ َْ َ‬
      ‫يَــا ُم ـ ْق ـلَـ ِـي َل ت ـُ ْقــلِــعِــي‬

                               ‫يَــا َزف ـْ ـ َـرِت ُخ ـ ْذ ُ‬
                     ‫صــعُـ َـدا‬
          ‫ي ــا َكـ ـبِ ـ ِـدي تَــص ــد ِ‬
      ‫َّع ــي‬   ‫َ‬                       ‫َ‬
                    ‫ـاد ي ٱ تَّئِ ْد‬  ‫وأَنْــت يا حـ ِ‬
                                             ‫َ َ َ َ‬
      ‫َض ـلُــعِــي‬
                 ‫فَـ ُ َ ْ َ ْ‬
                  ‫أ‬ ‫ـن‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬ ‫ـار‬‫ـ‬ ‫َّ‬
                                     ‫ن‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـٱ‬


‫‪120‬‬
No New Moon Risen




Between Náqa and Láʿlaʿ
Ájran gazelles


Graze the hillsides,
in a covert, hidden


No new moon rises
on that horizon


Without me wishing
it wouldn’t dare


Nor does the bare                             [5]
stone desert flash


Without me fearing
our exposure


May these eyes
pour tears forever


Sighs rise heavenward,
heart shatter!


Slowly now, driver,
my ribs burn




                          No New Moon Risen   121
‫]‪[10‬‬               ‫ـت ِمَّ ـ ــا َج ـ ـ َـرى‬         ‫ِ‬
                                          ‫ق ـ ـ ْد فَـ ــنـ ــيَـ ـ ْ‬
                   ‫ف ٱ لْ ِفر ِ‬
       ‫اق أ َْد ُمعِي‬  ‫َخـ ْـو َ َ‬
                         ‫َحـ ـ َّـى إِ َذ ا َحـ ـ َّـل ٱ لـ ـنـَّـ َـوى‬
       ‫ملْ ت ـَـ ْل ـ َـق َع ـيْــنَــا تَ ـ ْد َم ـ ُـع‬


                      ‫فَ ْٱر َح ْل إِ َل َو ِاد ي ٱ لْلِّ َوى‬
       ‫ـص ـ َـر ِع ــي‬                   ‫ِ‬
                    ‫َم ـ ْـربَ ــعـ ـ ِه ـ ْـم َوَم ـ ْ‬


                                                      ‫إِ َّن بِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـه أ ِ‬
                        ‫َح ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـبَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـي‬
       ‫َج ـ ـ ـ َـرِع‬       ‫ِ ِ ِ‬
                   ‫عـ ـْن ـ َـد مـ ــيَـ ــاه ْٱل ْ‬
                              ‫ـاد ِهـ ـ ـ ـ ْـم َم ـ ـ ـ ْـن لِـ ـ َفـ ـ ًـى‬
                                                                         ‫ونَـ ـ ـ ـ ِ‬
                                                                                    ‫َ‬
       ‫ِذ ي لَـ ـ ـ ْـو َعـ ـ ـ ٍـة ُم ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـو َّد ِع‬
                                                   ‫رم ـ ـ ـ ـ ِ ِ‬
‫]‪[15‬‬                                   ‫ـت ب ـ ـ ــه أَ ْش ـ ـ َ‬
                         ‫ـج ـ ــانُـ ــهُ‬                    ‫ََ ْ‬
                         ‫ٍ‬
       ‫بـَـ ْـه ـ َـم ــاءَ َر ْس ـ ـم بـَـ ْل ـ َق ـ ِع‬

                         ‫ـت ُد ًج ـ ــى‬             ‫يَـ ــا قَـ ـ َـمـ ـ ـراً َْتـ ـ ـ َ‬
       ‫ُخـ ـ ْذ ِم ـْن ــهُ َش ـ ْـي ــئًــا َو َد ِع‬

                        ‫َوَزِّو ِدي ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـه نـَ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـظْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـرًة‬
       ‫اك ٱ لْبـُْرقُ ِع‬
                       ‫ف َذ َ‬             ‫ِمن َخ ْل ِ‬
                                                             ‫ْ‬
                    ‫ـف َع ـ ـ ْـن‬             ‫ِلَنَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــهَ يَـ ـ ْ‬
                                 ‫ـض ـ ــعُ ـ ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـال ْٱل َْرَو ِع‬‫ٱلــمـ ِ‬          ‫ِ‬
                              ‫َد ْرك َْ َ‬


‫‪122‬‬
I wept and wept                                       [10]
at the thought of their leaving


And now they’re gone
I can give no more


Journey to the swale
of the twisting dune


Where they graze
where I lie fallen


There by Ájran waters
are those I love


So tell of a man
left torn apart


Cast down in sorrow                                   [15]
before the ruin


O hidden moon
take something from him


But leave him a glimpse
from behind the veil

(For he couldn’t bear
to behold such beauty)




                                  No New Moon Risen   123
                       ‫أ َْو َع ـ ـلِّـ ــلِ ـ ـي ـ ـ ِـه بِـ ــٱ لْ ـ ـ ُـم ـ ـ َـى‬
       ‫ـاه َْي ـ ــيَ ـ ــا َويَـ ــعِـ ــي‬      ‫َعـ ـ ـ َ‬
                                          ‫ـسـ ـ ـ َ‬


‫]‪[20‬‬                          ‫َمـ ـ ـ ـ ــا َه ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـو إِ َّل َمـ ـ ـيِّ ـ ـ ٌ‬
                              ‫ـت‬
                                                     ‫ب ـَـ ـ ـ ـ ْ َ‬
       ‫ـن ٱل ـ ـن ـَّ ـ َقـ ــا َولَـ ـ ْـع ـ ـلَـ ـ ِع‬



                                ‫ـت يَـ ـ ـأْ ًسـ ـ ــا َوأ ً‬
                    ‫َس ـ ـ ـ ـ ــى‬                        ‫فَ ـ ـ ُـم ـ ـ ُّ‬
       ‫ضــعِــي‬
              ‫َكـ َـمــا أَنَ ــا ِف َمـ ْـو َ‬


                      ‫ـصــبَــا‬
                             ‫ـح ٱلـ َّ‬        ‫ص ـ َـدقَـ ْ ِ‬
                                         ‫ـت ري ـ ُ‬         ‫َم ــا َ‬
                  ‫ـت بِـ ـ ْ‬                       ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـٱلُـ ـ َـد ِع‬          ‫ـن أَتَـ ـ ـ ْ‬
                                            ‫حـ ـ ـ َ‬
                        ‫ـح إِ َذ ا‬  ‫قَـ ـ ْد تَـ ـ ْكـ ـ ِـذ ُ ِ‬
                                ‫ب ٱ لـ ـ ِّـريـ ـ ُ‬
       ‫تُـ ْـس ـ ِـم ـ ُـع َم ــا َلْ يـُ ْـسـ َـم ـ ِع‬




‫‪124‬‬
And a potion of hope
to restore him to life


And to his senses
He is just a creature


Dead on the trail                                [20]
between Náqa and Láʿlaʿ


Dead from despair,
dead from grief


Dead like me
in the place I stand


What the Eastwind promised
was illusion


When she led you to hear
what wasn’t spoken




                             No New Moon Risen   125
                                                                                           ‫‪29‬‬




                      ‫بِأَيب ٱ لْغُصو ُن ٱ لْمائِسات عو ِ‬
                  ‫اط َفا‬  ‫َ َ ُ ََ‬          ‫ُ‬
      ‫ود َس َوالَِفا‬
                  ‫ٱل ُد ِ‬
                        ‫ات َعلَى ُْ‬
                                 ‫ُ‬ ‫ف‬‫أَلْع َِ‬
                                      ‫اط‬ ‫َ‬



                                               ‫ت ِم ـ َـن ٱلـ ُّ‬
                     ‫ـشــعُــوِر َغـ َـدائِـ ًـرا‬                          ‫ِ‬
                                                                   ‫أَلْـ ُـم ـ ْـرس ـ َـا ُ‬
               ‫أَلـ ـلَّـ ـيـِّــنَ ــات م ــع ــاقِ ـ ًـدا وم ــع ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاط ـ َف ــا‬ ‫ََ َ‬                 ‫ُ ََ‬



                  ‫َّل ِل َذ َل ِذ الً‬
                                  ‫ـات ِم ـ َـن ٱ لـ ــد َ‬    ‫أَلـ َّ ِ‬
                                                      ‫ـســاحــبَـ ُ‬
      ‫ال َمطَا ِرفَا‬‫ٱلم ِ‬          ‫َلل بِس ِ‬
                         ‫ات م َن َْ َ‬   ‫أ َّ َ ُ‬



                         ‫ت ِبُ ـ ْـس ــنِـ ـ ِه ـ َّـن ِص ــيَ ــانَـ ـةً‬         ‫ِ‬
                                                                        ‫أَلْ ـ ــبَـ ــاخ ـ ـ َـا ُ‬
      ‫ـات َم ــتَ ــالِ ـ ًـدا َوَمـ ـطَ ــا ِرفَ ــا‬                 ‫ِ‬
                                                     ‫أَلْـ ـ َـواهـ ــبَـ ـ ُ‬



                           ‫ـاح ـ ًك ــا وم ــب ـ ِ‬
                       ‫ـاسًــا‬                  ‫أَلْ ــم ــؤنِ ـ َق ــات م ــض ـ ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                            ‫ََ َ‬                 ‫ُ َ َ‬                 ‫ُ‬
                  ‫أَلـ ـطَّـ ـيِّ ــب ــات مـ ـ َقـ ـبَّـ ـاً ومـ ــر ِ‬
      ‫اش ـ ـ َفـ ــا‬ ‫ََ َ‬                    ‫َ ُ ُ‬




‫‪126‬‬
Circling




I swear by my father’s
   life they sway
like boughs, strands
   along the cheeks


As their tresses
   gently fall
Soft and supple
   through shoulder and wrist


They walk forth trailing
   flirtatious pride
in gowns of luxuriant
   silken splendor


Cautious, they hold back
   their beauty but give
of their treasures freely,
   old and new


A laugh’s glamour,                         [5]
   a welcoming smile,
the ambrosial elixir
   of a kiss




                                Circling   127
                                                                 ‫ِ‬
                            ‫ـاع ــم ــات ُم ـ ـ َّـردا وٱلْ ـ َك ـ ِ‬
                    ‫ـاع ــبَــا‬         ‫أَل ـنَّـ َ ُ َ ً َ‬
       ‫ات طََرائَِفا‬    ‫ِ‬
                  ‫ت ُمـن ـَ َّـهـ ًـد ا َوٱ لْ ُم ْهد يَ ُ‬
                                                         ‫ُ‬



                       ‫ب‬‫ـات بِ ُك ِّل ِس ْح ٍر ُم ْع ِج ٍ‬   ‫أْ ِ‬
                                                      ‫َلـَـالــبَـ ُ‬
       ‫ام ًعا َولَطَائَِفا‬
                        ‫يث مس ِ‬    ‫ِعْن َد ْ ِ ِ‬
                           ‫ٱلَد َ َ‬



                                    ‫ـســاتـِـرات ِمــن ْ ِ‬
                            ‫ـاء َمـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـاســنًــا‬‫ٱلَــيَـ َ‬      ‫أَلـ َّ َ ُ َ‬
              ‫ب ٱلت َِّق َّي ْ‬
       ‫ٱلَائَِفا‬                             ‫ِ‬
                              ‫تَ ْسِب بَا ٱ لْ َق ْل َ‬



                                 ‫ـات ِم ـ َـن ٱل ـث ـُّـغُــوِر َللِــيًــا‬  ‫ِ‬
                                                                        ‫أَلْـ ُـم ـ ْـب ــديَـ ُ‬
       ‫ضــعِـيـ ًفــا تَــالِـ َفــا‬           ‫ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬
                                   ‫تَـ ْشــفــي بِـ ِري ـ َقــتـ َـهــا َ‬



                                   ‫ـون رو ِ‬
                            ‫اشـ ًقــا‬      ‫ِ‬                     ‫أَلـ َّـر ِامــيـ ِ‬
‫]‪[10‬‬
                                      ‫ـات مـ َـن ٱلْــعُــيُـ َ َ‬    ‫َ ُ‬
               ‫ِ‬          ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـٱلُ ــروب ُمــثَــاق ـ َفــا‬    ‫ِ‬
                                    ‫ـرا ب ـ ْ‬
                                           ‫قـَـ ْل ــبًــا َخ ـب ـ ً‬



                           ‫ـوب أ َِهـلَّـةً‬
                                          ‫ٱلــيـ ِ‬
                                                  ‫ـات مـ َـن ُْ ُ‬
                                                                      ‫ٱلْــمـطْــلِــعـ ِ‬
                                                                         ‫ُ َ ُ‬
               ‫ِ‬         ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـن َم ـ َـع ٱل ـتَّـ َـمــام َكـ َـواس ـ َفــا‬‫َل يـُـ ْل ـ َفـ َ َّ‬


‫‪128‬‬
A word, a phrase
   or plaintive call
to enchant the ear
   and bind the soul


A woman’s embrace,
   a girl’s charms,
graces giving
   wonder on wonder


With modest veils
   over such beauty
as would ruin
   a God-­fearing man


O how their teeth
   glow with a liquor
that would bring
   back the dead!


Their eyes’ arrows                  [10]
   piercing the heart
of a man long-­
   practiced in war


New moons rising
   from their bodices—
Once full they’ll
   never fade


                         Circling   129
                            ‫ـات ِمـ َـن ٱ لـ ُّـد ُمـ ِ‬
                ‫ـوع َس َحائِبًا‬                            ‫ِ‬
                                                    ‫أَلْـ ُـمـْنــشــئَـ ُ‬
           ‫ٱلزفِ ِري قـو ِ‬
       ‫اص َفا‬                ‫أَلْمس ِمع ِ‬
              ‫ات م َن َّ ََ‬      ‫ُْ َ ُ‬



                                                                      ‫ِ‬
                                                                ‫ـاح ـ ـ ِ‬
                                       ‫ـج ـ ِـي ُخْ ـ َ‬
                            ‫ـص ــانَـ ـةٌ‬                        ‫ص ـ ـ ََّ‬
                                                     ‫ـي بُـ ْـه ـ َ‬       ‫يَـ ــا َ‬
                                        ‫ل أَيـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاد يـً ــا َو َعـ ـ َـوا ِرفَـ ــا‬          ‫َس ـ ـ َـد ْ ِ‬
                                             ‫ت إ ََّ َ‬            ‫أْ‬



                                  ‫ِ‬                                      ‫نُ ِظم ِ‬
                             ‫َّم ِل فَ ِه َي نظَ ُ‬
                          ‫امنَا‬                      ‫ام ٱلش ْ‬     ‫ت نظَ َ‬ ‫َ ْ‬
                               ‫ِ‬                  ‫َعـ َـربِـيَّـةٌ َعـ ْ‬
       ‫ـجـ َـمــاءُ ت ـُْل ـهــي ٱلْـ َـعــا ِرفَــا‬



‫]‪[15‬‬            ‫ص َوا ِرًما‬ ‫ك َ‬    ‫ت َعلَْي َ‬   ‫ـت َسلَّ ْ‬
                                                        ‫َم ْه َما َرنـَ ْ‬
           ‫ـك مــبـ ِـســمــهــا بـ ِريـ ًقــا خ ِ‬
       ‫اط َفا‬ ‫َ‬           ‫َويُـ ِريـ َ َ ْ ُ َ َ‬



                    ‫ٱلِـ َـمــى‬ ‫ـاحــي قِـ َفــا بِـأَ ْكــنَـ ِ‬
                                                             ‫يــا ِ‬
                             ‫ـاف ْ‬                        ‫صـ ََّ‬ ‫َ َ‬
       ‫ـي قِ َفا قِ َفا‬ ‫ـ‬                 ‫ِمــن حـ ِ‬
                           ‫ـاجـ ٍر يــا صـ ِ‬
                          ‫ـاح‬
                     ‫َ َ ََّ‬                   ‫ْ َ‬



                    ‫يس ُه ْم‬ ‫حـ َّـى أُســا يِــل أَيــن ســار ِ‬
                          ‫تع ُ‬  ‫َ َ َ َْ َ َ ْ‬
          ‫ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
       ‫ت َم َعاطبًا َو َمتَال َفا‬                ‫ِ‬
                                 ‫فـََقد ٱ قـْتَ َح ْم ُ‬


‫‪130‬‬
And tears bursting
   in cascades,
and sighs deep
   as rolling thunder


O my companions,
   my bones’ marrow!
for a slender girl
   who gave me her favor


She joins all
   to all in harmony
Arabic or Persian
   she’d charm the sage


Wherever she gazes                      [15]
   she bares a sword
Lightning shimmers
   in her smile


Halt, dear friends,
   at the borders
of Híma, near Hājir,
   halt there, please


That I may ask where
   their red-­roans turn
I’ve ridden through peril
   and the shadow of death


                             Circling   131
                                                          ‫وم ـ ــع ـ ــالِـ ــم ـ ــا و َمـ ـ ـ ـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـاه ـ ـ ـ ـاً بِ ـ ِـش ـ ِـمـ ـلَّ ـ ٍـة‬      ‫ََ َ ً َ َ‬
          ‫ِ‬                   ‫ِ‬
       ‫تَ ْش ُكو ٱ لْ َو َجا َو َسبَاسبًا َوتـَنَائ َفا‬



                                                            ‫ِ‬
                                             ‫َم ـطْـ ِويَّـةُ ْٱلَقـْـ ـ َـراب أَ ْذ َه ـ َ‬
                           ‫ـب َس ـي ـْ ُـرَهــا‬
       ‫ـوى َو َس ـ َـدائِ ـ َف ــا‬                        ‫ِِ ٍِ‬
                                     ‫بَــث ـي ــثَــة م ـنْـ َـه ــا قُـ ـ ً‬



                              ‫ح ـ َّـى وق ـ ـ ْف ــت ِب ــا بِــرم ـلَ ـ ِـة ح ـ ِ‬
                         ‫ـاج ـ ٍر‬
‫]‪[20‬‬                                   ‫َ َ َ ُ َ َْ َ‬
       ‫ـت نـُـوقًــا بِـ ْـٱلُث ـَ ْـي ـ ِـل َخـ َـوالِـ َفــا‬
                                                            ‫فـَـ َـرأَيْـ ُ‬



                  ‫ـاد َهـ ــا قَـ ـ َـمـ ـ ٌـر َعـ ـلَ ـ ْـي ـ ِـه َم ـ َـه ــابـَ ـةٌ‬
                                                                                   ‫يَـ ـ ْقـ ــتَـ ـ ُ‬
           ‫ِ‬        ‫ِ‬
       ‫ت م ْن َح َذ ٍر َعلَْيه َشَراس َفا‬                ‫ِ‬
                                                           ‫فَطََويْ ُ‬



                      ‫اف فـَلَ ْم أَ ُك ْن‬ ‫قَمر تـعَّرض ِف ٱلطَّو ِ‬
                                                   ‫َ‬                   ‫َ ٌ ََ َ‬
       ‫بِـ ِـس ـ َـواهُ ِع ـْن ـ َـد طَـ َـوافِ ـ ِـه ِيب طَــائِـ َفــا‬



                                      ‫ِِ‬                            ‫ِ ِ‬
                       ‫ـح ـ ــو ب ـ ـفـ ــاضـ ـ ِـل ب ـُ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْـرده آثـَ ـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
                     ‫ـارهُ‬                                                             ‫َيْـ ـ ُ‬
          ‫ِ‬
       ‫يل ٱ لْ َقائ َفا‬  ‫ِ‬   ‫ت َّ‬
                      ‫ٱلد ل َ‬          ‫ار لَو ُكْن َ‬            ‫فـَتُ َح ُ‬


‫‪132‬‬
Past the last way-­stone
   into trackless spaces
on a hard-­strider groaning
   through the desert void,


Flanks gaunt
   hump hollowed
forces spent
   from her journey’s pace


I brought her to halt                    [20]
   at Hājir’s sands
near Tamarisk, seeing
   nurslings and mares


Led by a moon
   of ghastly mien
I folded toward him
   in desire and fear


He appeared
   in the circling as
around him I turned,
   he around me


His footprints effaced
   by the edge of his robe,
so baffling should you
   seek to follow


                              Circling   133
                                                                             ‫‪30‬‬




                                                  ‫ِ‬           ‫ِ‬           ‫ِ‬
                                   ‫ب قَطَا‬   ‫بأُثـَْي َل ت ٱلنـََّقا س ْر ُ‬
      ‫ٱلُـ ْـسـ ُـن َعـلَـ ْـيـ ِـه طـُـنُــبَــا‬
                                               ‫ب ْ‬  ‫ض ـ َـر َ‬
                                                            ‫َ‬



                                               ‫ِ‬
                             ‫ض ـ ٍم‬‫َج ـ َـوا ِز ٱلْـ َفـ َـا مـ ْـن إِ َ‬
                                                                      ‫َوبِ ـأ ْ‬
      ‫نَـ َـع ـ ٌـم تـَـ ْـر َع ــى لَـ َـديْـ َـه ــا َو ِظ ـ َـى‬



                        ‫ٱسـت ـَْنـ ِـطـ َقــا‬          ‫ِ ِ‬
                                           ‫يـَـا َخــلـيـلَـ َّـي قـ َفــا َو ْ‬
      ‫َر ْس َم َد ا ٍر بـَْع َد ُه ْم قَ ْد َخ ِربَا‬




                                      ‫ـى فَـ َ‬
                                ‫ـارقَــهُ‬   ‫ـب فَ ـ ً‬  ‫َوٱنْ ـ ُـدبَ ــا ق ـَـ ْل ـ َ‬
             ‫ِ‬                    ‫ِ‬
      ‫يَـ ْـوَم بـَـانـُوا َوٱبْــكــيَــا َوٱن ـْـتَــحــبَــا‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                                        ‫َعـ ـلَّ ــهُ ُيْ ـ ـ ـ ِـرُ َح ـ ْـي ـ ُ‬
                           ‫ـث َيَّـ ُـمـ ـوا‬
      ‫ٱلِـ َـم ــى أ َْم لِـ ُقــبَــا‬
                                    ‫ـاء ْ‬ ‫َلـ ــرعـ ـ ِ‬‫ِ‬
                                               ‫أ ََْ‬




‫‪134‬‬
Like Sába’s Lost Tribes




In the tamarisk stand
  near White Dune
sand grouse shelter
  and beauty camps


Within a desert
  slashed by ravines
camels graze
  among gazelles


O my two
  friends, halt
here and question
  these ruins


As you grieve
  for a young man
who lost his heart
  when she went away


Have they set out                                   [5]
  for Híma’s sands
or might they be headed
  to Qúba instead?




                          Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   135
                              ‫يس َوَلْ أَ ْشــعُـ ْـر بِِـ ْـم‬   ‫ِ‬
                                                            ‫َر َّحـلُـوا ٱ لْع َ‬
                   ‫أَلِ ــس ــهـ ـ ٍو َك ـ ــا َن أَم طَ ـ ــر ٍ‬
       ‫ف نـَــبَ ــا‬ ‫ْ ْ‬                                 ‫َْ‬



                                       ‫اك َوَل ٰهـ ـ َذ ا َو َم ــا‬    ‫َلْ يَـ ُكـ ْـن َذ َ‬
       ‫َك ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا َن إِ َّل َولَ ـ ـ ـ ــهٌ قَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْد َغـ ـلَ ــبَ ــا‬



                             ‫ت َوٱفـْـت ـَ َـرقَـ ْ‬
                            ‫ـت‬                          ‫ـومــا َش ـ َـرَد ْ‬‫يـَـا ُهُـ ً‬
                  ‫ِ‬
       ‫َخ ـ ْل ـ َفـ ُـهـ ْـم تَـطْ ـلُـب ـُ ُـهـ ْـم أَيْـ ــدي َســبَــا‬



                               ‫ـاد يـْـت ـُ َـه ــا‬
                                                ‫ـت نَـ َ‬
                                                      ‫ـسـ َـمـ ْ‬             ‫أ ُّ ِ‬
                                                                ‫َي ري ـ ٍـح نـَ َ‬
               ‫يـَ ــا َشَـ ـ ــاالً يـَ ــا َج ــنُ ــوبًــا يـَ ــا َ‬
       ‫ص ــبَــا‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                                ‫َهـ ـ ْـل لَ ـ َـديْـ ـ ُك ـ ْـم َخـ ـبـَـ ٌـر ِمـَّ ــا بِــنَــا‬
       ‫ـصــبَــا‬                                     ‫ِ ِ‬
              ‫قَـ ـ ْد لَــق ـي ــنَــا مـ ـ ْـن نَـ ـ َـو ُاه ـ ـ ْـم نَـ َ‬



                          ‫َخبَ َارَها‬     ‫يح َّ‬
                                   ‫ٱلصبَا أ ْ‬   ‫َسنَ َد ْ ِ‬
                                              ‫ترُ‬        ‫أْ‬
          ‫ِّيح َع ْن َزْه ِر ُّ‬
       ‫ٱلربَا‬                           ‫ِ‬
                             ‫َع ْن نـَبَات ٱلش ِ‬


‫‪136‬‬
I didn’t notice them
   saddling to leave—
Did my senses fail me
   or my attention?


It wasn’t this
   and wasn’t that
but a conflagra-­
   tion of desire


And O my cares—
   how you dispersed,
scattering after them
   like Sába’s lost tribes!


I call the fragrant
   winds as they pass:
Northwind, South,
   Sweet-­scented East!


Has news of us,                                         [10]
   so weary and spent
in their absence,
   reached you?


The Eastwind brought
   the absinthe’s word
taken it in turn
   from the mountain flower


                              Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   137
                             ‫ض ــهُ َد اءُ ٱ ْلَـ َـوى‬                          ‫أ َّ‬
                                                         ‫َن َم ـ ْـن أ َْم ـ َـر َ‬
       ‫ـص ــبَــا‬            ‫ف ـ ـ ْلـ ـيـ ــعـ ـلَّ ــل بِـ ـأَحـ ـ ِ‬
                       ‫ـاديـ ـ ِ‬
               ‫ـث ٱل ـ ِّ‬         ‫َ َُ ْ َ‬



                              ‫ـال َخـ ـ ِِّـري‬          ‫ـت يَ ــا َشَ ـ ـ ٌ‬      ‫ُثَّ قَ ــا لَ ـ ْ‬
       ‫ـج ــبَ ــا‬  ‫ِمـ ـث ـْ ـلَ ـ َـم ــا َخـ ـ ـبـَّـ ـ ْـرتُـ ــهُ أ َْو أ ْ‬
                ‫َع ـ َ‬



                                  ‫ـوب َحـ ِّـد ثِــي‬                             ‫ِ‬
                                                           ‫ُثَّ أَنْـ ــت يَــا َج ــنُـ ٌ‬
                      ‫ِمـ ـثْ ـ َـل َمـ ــا َحـ ـ َّـد ث ـْ ــتُـ ــهُ أ َْو أ ْ‬
       ‫َع ـ ـ َذ بَـ ــا‬



‫]‪[15‬‬                             ‫ـشـ ْـمـأ َُل ِعـْنـ ِـدي ف ـَ َـر ٌج‬     ‫قَــالَـ ِ‬
                                                                    ‫ـت ٱلـ َّ‬
       ‫ـال ْٱل َْزيـَــبَ ــا‬      ‫ـت فِـيـ ِـه ٱلـ َّ‬
                          ‫ـشـ َـمـ ُ‬                         ‫َش ـ َ‬
                                                       ‫ـارَك ـ ْ‬



                                  ‫ـســنَــا‬                                 ‫ٍِ‬
                                         ‫ُكـ ُّـل ُس ــوء ف َهـ َـو ُاهـ ْـم َحـ ُ‬
       ‫ـاهـ ـ ــم َعـ ـ ـ ُذبَـ ــا‬                 ‫و َع ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َذ ٍ‬
                                       ‫اب بِـ ـ ـ ِر َ‬
                                ‫ضـ ـ ـ ُ‬                                    ‫َ‬



                          ‫فَـ ـ ـِإ َل َمـ ــا َو َع ـ ـلَـ ــى َمـ ــا َولِ ـ َـم ــا‬
          ‫ث َوتَ ْش ُكو ٱ لْ َو َ‬
       ‫صبَا‬                            ‫تَ ْشتَكي ٱ لْبَ َّ‬



‫‪138‬‬
Whoever suffers
   love’s ills
hadiths of young
   passion may heal


Give us a word
   like the one given,
she said to the Northwind,
   or more wondrous still


And you, then, wind
   from the South,
bring news as sweet
   as mine or sweeter


I bring you, South                                        [15]
   said, glad tidings
shared by the North
   and Southwest


All wrongs endured
   become graces,
all pain, if it pleases them,
   turns to pleasure


Till when and why
   do you lament
their leaving and
   count your wounds?


                                Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   139
                                ‫َوإِ َذ ا َمـ ــا َو َعـ ـ ـ ُـد وُكـ ـ ـ ْـم َمـ ــا تـَـ ـ َـرى‬
       ‫ب ـَ ـ ـ ـ ْـرقَـ ـ ـ ــهُ إِ َّل بَـ ـ ـ ِريـ ـ ـ ًق ـ ــا ُخ ـ ـلَّـ ــبَـ ــا‬



                             ‫َرقَـ ـ َـم ٱ لْــغَـ ْـي ـ ُـم َع ـلَــى ُرْد ِن ٱ لْــغَـ َـمــا‬
       ‫ِم ـ ْـن َســنَــا ٱلْـ ـبـَـ ْـرِق ِطـ ـ َـرازاً ُم ـ ْذ َهــبَــا‬



‫]‪[20‬‬                      ‫ت أ َْد ُم ــعُ ـ َـه ــا ِم ـنـْـ َـه ــا َع ـلَــى‬        ‫فَـ ـ َ‬
                                                                             ‫ـجـ ـ َـر ْ‬
                  ‫ـح ـ ِن َخ ـ َّـديْـ َـه ــا فَـ ـأَذْ َك ـ ْ‬
       ‫ـت َلـَـبَــا‬                                          ‫صـ ْ‬   ‫َ‬



                                               ‫َو ْر َد ةٌ نَ ـ ــا بِ ـ ــتَـ ـ ـةٌ ِم ـ ـ ـ ْـن أ ْ‬
                            ‫َد ُمـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍع‬
       ‫ـج ــبَــا‬                                ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬
               ‫ـس ُيْـ ــط ـ ـ ُـر َغ ـ ْـي ــثً ــا َع ـ َ‬‫نـَـ ـ ْـرج ـ ـ ٌ‬



                              ‫ـت‬                       ‫ـت َج ــنَ ـ َ‬
                                ‫ـاه ــا أ َْر َسـ ـلَ ـ ْ‬           ‫َوَم ـ ـ َـى ُرْم ـ ـ َ‬
                                                       ‫ـف ُ‬
       ‫صـ ْد َغـي ـْ َـهــا َعـلَـي ـْ َـهــا َع ْقَربَا‬       ‫َعـطْـ َ‬



                          ‫س إِ َذا َما ٱبـْتَ َس َم ْ‬
                          ‫ت‬                                          ‫تُ ْش ِر ُق َ‬
                                                              ‫ٱلش ْم ُ‬
       ‫ٱلَ ــبَ ــبَ ــا‬ ‫ب َم ـ ــا أَن ـْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـوَر َذ َ‬
                      ‫اك ْ‬                                     ‫َر ِّ‬


‫‪140‬‬
Whatever they promise
   you see in the lightning
only the flash
   of a rainless cloud


There on the fringe
   of dark, the cloud
wove a filigree
   of pure gold


Then sent tears                                         [20]
   running along
its cheeks, then
   kindled a flame


Eyes as black
   as narcissi shone
and a rose appeared
   upon her cheek


If you seek it
   she will lower
her scorpion curls
   over her temples


The sun rises
   in her smile
How clearly, lord,
   her moist teeth shine!


                              Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   141
                                       ‫ـت‬‫يَـطْـلُـ ُـع ٱ لْـلَّـ ْـيـ ُـل إِ َذ ا َمــا َسـ َـد لَـ ْ‬
                                                                       ‫فَـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاحًـ ــا َج ـ ـثْ ـ ـاً أَثِـ ـيـ ــثًـ ــا َغـ ـيـْـ َـه ــبَ ــا‬



‫]‪[25‬‬                          ‫َّح ُل َم ْه َما تـََفلَ ْ‬
                              ‫ت‬                             ‫يـَتَ َج َ‬
                                                     ‫ارى ٱلن ْ‬
                  ‫اك ٱ لـ َّ‬
       ‫ـشــنَــبَــا‬      ‫ب َذ َ‬          ‫ب َم ــا أ ْ‬
                                ‫َعـ ـ ـ َذ َ‬          ‫َر ِّ‬



                                                                    ‫َوإِ َذ ا َم ـ ــا لَـ ـ ْ‬
                         ‫ـت أ ََرتـْـ ـ ــنَ ـ ـ ــا ف ـَ ـنـَــنً ــا‬
       ‫ت ِم َن ٱللَّ ْح ِظ ظُبَا‬         ‫ت َسلَّ ْ‬           ‫أ َْو َرنَ ْ‬



                                   ‫اج ٍر‬  ‫اغي بِٱلنـََّقا ِمن ح ِ‬                ‫َكم تـنَ ِ‬
                                                ‫ْ َ‬                                 ‫ُ‬
       ‫ب ٱلْـ ــعُـ ـ ُـربَـ ــا‬ ‫ِ‬‫ـر‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـع‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                                                  ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـل‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ي ـ ــا سـ ــلِ‬
                               ‫َ َ َ َ َ ِّ‬



                                  ‫ب َولِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َذ ا‬
                                                           ‫أَنَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا إِ َّل َع ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـرِ ٌّ‬
       ‫ـض َوأ َْهـ ـ َـوى ٱلْـ َـعـ َـربـَـا‬     ‫ـش ـ ُـق ٱلْـبِـيـ َ‬        ‫َع ـ َ‬    ‫أْ‬



                                   ‫َل أُبَ ـ ـ ِـال َش ـ ـ َّـر َق ٱ لْـ ـ َـو ْجـ ـ ُـد بِــنَــا‬
       ‫ـت بِ ـ ِـه أ َْو َغـ َّـربَــا‬  ‫ـث َم ــا َك ــا نَـ ْ‬     ‫َح ـ ْـي ـ ُ‬


‫‪142‬‬
Night falls
   as she loosens
the plush jet
   black of her hair


She spits and brings                                    [25]
   bliss to the bees
Much sweeter, lord,
   the nectar of her kiss


Like a willow
   in the wind she moves
Her glance bares
   a glimmering sword


How far will you go,
   Arab son,
courting the women
   by Hājir’s white sands!


I’m but an Arab
   born to love
bright beauties
   of my kind


Whether passion
   rises within me
or sets, no matter—
   so long as they’re there


                              Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   143
‫]‪[30‬‬                              ‫ـت أ ََل قَــا لُـوا أ ََمــا‬  ‫ُكـلَّـ َـمــا قـُـ ْلـ ُ‬
       ‫ـت َه ـ ْـل قَــا لُـوا أَبَــا‬   ‫َوإِ َذ ا َم ــا قـُـ ْل ـ ُ‬



                                 ‫َوَمـ َـى َما أ َْنَـ ُـد وا أ َْو أَت ـْ َـهـ ُـمـوا‬
       ‫ـث ٱل ـطَّـلَــبَــا‬     ‫أَقْـ ـطَ ـ ُـع ٱلْ ـبِ ـي ـ َـد أ ُ‬
                         ‫َح ـ ـ ُّ‬



                                                         ‫ي ٱ لْــوقْـ ِ‬
                                   ‫ـت ق ـَْلـِـي ُكلَّ َما‬             ‫ِِ‬
                                                               ‫َســامـر ُّ َ‬
       ‫ـار ي ـَْـبــغِــي ٱلْـ َـمـ ْذ َهــبَــا‬           ‫أَبْـ َ‬
                                             ‫ـصـ َـر ْٱلثَـ َ‬



                         ‫َوإِ َذ ا ُه ــم َغ ـ َّـربُـوا أ َْو َشـ َّـرقُـوا‬
            ‫ي يـَْق ُفو َّ‬
       ‫ٱلسبَبَا‬           ‫َكا َن َذ ا ٱ لْ َقرنـَْ ِ‬
                                  ‫ْ‬



                                                   ‫َك ــم َد َع ــونَــا لِـ ـ ِوص ـ ٍ‬
                                    ‫ـال َر َغــبًــا‬       ‫َ‬            ‫ْ ْ‬
       ‫َك ـ ْـم َد َع ـ ْـونَ ــا ِم ـ ْـن فِـ ـ ـ َـر ٍاق َرَه ــبَــا‬



‫]‪[35‬‬                                ‫يَــا بَـ ِـي ٱلْـ ـ ـ ـ َّـزْوَر ِاء ٰه ــذا قَـ َـمـ ٌـر‬
       ‫ِع ـْن ـ َد ُك ـ ْـم َل َح َو ِعـ ـْن ـ ِـد ي َغ ـ َـربَــا‬


‫‪144‬‬
Isn’t it? I said                                         [30]
   They said it isn’t
And when I asked maybe . . .
   they added not


Whenever they rode
   toward highland or plain
I tore through the desert
   in fierce pursuit


My heart’s the Sāmiri
   of the moment
Discerning the trace
   it casts for gold


East or west
   I’m on their trail
like Iskándar gliding
   on heaven’s cords


When we were with her
   we cried out in pleasure
then in her absence
   cried out in fear


O sons of Zawrā—                                         [35]
   behold the full moon
rising above you
   as it slips my horizon


                               Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   145
                                              ‫ح ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــرِب و ِ‬
              ‫ٱهلل ِمـ ـ ـْن ـ ــهُ َح ـ ـ ـ َـرِب‬ ‫َ َ َ‬
      ‫اد ي َخ ْل َفهُ َوا َحَربَا‬     ‫َكم أُنَ ِ‬
                                               ‫ْ‬



                    ‫ىت‬   ‫ِ ِ‬                                  ‫ِ‬
                    ‫ف نـَْفسي ل َف ً‬        ‫ف نـَْفسي َلْ َ‬     ‫َلْ َ‬
                     ‫ُكـ ـلَّـ َـم ــا َغ ـ ـ َّـى َحَـ ـ ـ ٌ‬
      ‫ـام غُ ـيِّــبَــا‬




‫‪146‬‬
Woe is me,
   I call in their wake,
woe is me . . .
   ruination!


Woe O woe,
   woe for a lad
At the cry of a dove
   he’s gone




                           Like Sába’s Lost Tribes   147
                                                                                          ‫‪31‬‬




                                                         ‫ِ‬
                                                  ‫َض ــاءَ بِ ـ َذات ْٱل َ‬
                                  ‫َض ــا بَــا ِر ٌق‬                    ‫أَ‬
      ‫ِم ـ َـن ٱ ل ـنُّــو ِر ِف َج ـ ِّـو َه ــا َخــافِـ ُـق‬


                                 ‫ـاج ــاتِـ ِـه‬
                                            ‫ـص ـ َـل َر ْع ـ ـ ُـد ُم ــنَـ َ‬           ‫َو َ‬
                                                                              ‫صـ ـ ْل ـ َ‬
         ‫ِ‬                                          ‫ِ‬
      ‫فَـ ـ ـأ َْر َس ـ ـ َـل م ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْد َر َارهُ ٱلْـ ـ ـ ـ َـواد ُق‬


                       ‫عوا‬                       ‫ِ‬
                                               ‫اد ْوا أَن ُ‬
                        ‫يخوا فـَلَ ْم يَ ْس َم ُ‬         ‫تـَنَ َ‬
                   ‫ِ‬
      ‫ت ِم َن ٱ لْ َو ْجد يَا َسائِ ُق‬       ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫فَص ْح ُ‬


                                  ‫أ ََل فَــٱ نْ ـ ِزلُـوا ٰهـ ُـهــنَــا َوأ َْربـَــعُـ ـوا‬
      ‫فَ ـ ـ ـِإ ِّن ِبـَ ـ ـ ْـن ِع ـ ـْن ـ ـ َد ُكـ ـ ْـم َو ِامـ ـ ـ ُـق‬


‫]‪[5‬‬                             ‫ِبَـ ـيْـ ـ َفـ ــاءَ َغ ـ ـ ْـي ـ ـ َـداءَ ُر ْع ــبُ ــوبَ ـ ٍـة‬
      ‫ـشـ ـ ِـجـ ـ ِّـي َلَـ ــا تَـ ــائـِ ـ ُـق‬
                                               ‫ف ـُـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـؤ ُاد ٱلـ ـ َّ‬


                                   ‫ي لَـ َـدى ِذ ْكـ ِرَهــا‬      ‫ـوح ٱلـنَّـ ِـد ُّ‬
                                                                                 ‫ي ـَ ُفـ ُ‬
              ‫ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬     ‫ٍ‬
      ‫ـس ـ ــان بـَ ـ ـ ــا نَـ ــاط ـ ـ ُـق‬         ‫ِ‬
                                               ‫فَ ـ ـ ُك ـ ـ ُّـل ل ـ ـ َ‬




‫‪148‬‬
Áda Trail




Lightning lit up Dhāt-­
al-­Áda, flashes shuddering
steep valley sides


A chain of rumbling
across the sky, then
thunder unleashed rains!


Kneel the camels! they shout
to all—but no one hears
Driver, I scream


Graze the camels!
For the love of a girl
in your care, a slender thing—


Soft her gestures, delicate                  [5]
her walk—the heart of a
sad soul breaks


Mention her and we sigh
Every tongue
whispers her name




                                 Áda Trail   149
                        ‫ـضـ َـم ـةٌ‬                        ‫ف ـ ـلَ ــو أ َّ ِ‬
                                  ‫ـسـ َـهــا َهـ ْ‬  ‫َن َْمــلـ َ‬  ‫َ ْ‬
       ‫َوَمـ ـ ْق ـ َـع ـ ُـد َه ــا َج ــبَ ـ ٌـل َح ــالِـ ٌـق‬


                            ‫لَـ ـ َك ــا َن ٱلْـ ـ َقـ ـ َـر ُار ِبَــا َحــالِـ ًقــا‬
       ‫ٱلَــالِـ َـق ٱلـَّـر ِامـ ُـق‬
                                    ‫ولَـ ْـن يُـ ْد ِرَك ْ‬


                            ‫اب ِب ـ ــا ع ـ ِ‬
                      ‫ـام ـ ٌـر‬ ‫فَـ ـ ُك ـ ُّـل َخـ ـ ـ ـ َـر ٍ َ َ‬
          ‫اب ِبـ ــا َغ ـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاد ُق‬                 ‫ٍ‬
                       ‫وُك ـ ـ ُّـل َس ـ ـ َـر َ‬


‫]‪[10‬‬                        ‫ـاض ِبَـ ـ ــا َز ِاه ـ ـ ـ ٌـر‬
                                                        ‫وُك ـ ـ ـ ُّـل ِريَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍ‬
       ‫اب ِبَـ ــا َرائِ ـ ـ ُـق‬      ‫وُكـ ـ ـ ُّـل َش ـ ـ ــر ٍ‬
                                            ‫َ‬                  ‫َ‬


                 ‫ف ـَلَـْـيــلِـ َـي ِمـ ْـن َو ْجـ ِهـ َـهــا ُمـ ْشـ ِر ٌق‬
          ‫ويـوِمي ِمن َشع ِرها َغ ِ‬
       ‫اس ُق‬    ‫َ َْ َ ْ ْ َ‬


                           ‫ب إِ ْذ‬        ‫ت َحبَّةَ ٱ لْ َق ْل ِ‬  ‫لََقد فـَلَ َق ْ‬
       ‫َس ـ ُـه ـ ِـم ـ ِـه ٱلْ ـ َف ــالِـ ُـق‬
                                             ‫ـاه ــا بِ ـأ ْ‬
                                                         ‫َرَم ـ َ‬


                             ‫عُــيُــو ٌن ت ـَ َـعـ َّـو ْد َن َر ْشـ َـق ْ‬
                        ‫ٱلَ َشا‬
             ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـش َل ـَـا َراش ـ ُـق‬      ‫ِ‬
                                        ‫فـَـلَـ ْـيـ َ‬
                            ‫ـس يَــط ـيـ ُ‬




‫‪150‬‬
She makes her home on
a bald-­cap mountain
Were she camped below


Lowlands would rise
and the heights would soar
beyond the gaze


Every ruin, she brings
to life, she turns mirage
into quenching rains


With her, every garden                         [10]
bursts into flower
All wine is pure


Her countenance illu-­
mines my night, dark
in the fall of her hair’s my day


The Sunderer split my
heart down center
when she let her arrows fly

With eyes adept at
finding their target
she buried the arrows inside




                                   Áda Trail   151
                             ‫فَما َهامةٌ ِف َخر ِ‬
                 ‫اب ٱ لْبِ َق ِ‬
                ‫اع‬              ‫َ‬       ‫َ َ‬
          ‫ِ‬
       ‫اق ُحٍّر َوالَ نَاع ُق‬ ‫َوَل َس ُ‬


‫]‪[15‬‬              ‫بِـ ـ ـأَ ْشـ ـ ـأ ََم ِمـ ـ ْـن بَـ ـ ــا ِزٍل َر َّحـ ـلُـ ـوا‬
       ‫لِيَ ْح ِم َل َم ْن ُح ْسنُهُ فَائِ ُق‬


                       ‫ِ‬
                 ‫ـب بِـ َذات ْٱل َ‬
              ‫َضــا‬                 ‫َوي ـُت ـْ َـر ُك َ‬
                                ‫صـ ٌّ‬
          ‫قَتِيالً وِف حبِّ ِهم ص ِ‬
       ‫اد ُق‬ ‫َ ُ ْ َ‬




‫‪152‬‬
No owl in a ruin
No turtledove either
No, not even a crow


Is more baleful                      [15]
than an old camel
saddled to carry


That fatal beauty away
and leave a man
still loving


Dead on Áda trail




                         Áda Trail   153
                                                                                                   ‫‪32‬‬




                                             ‫ـش ـبِـيــبَـ ِـة َوٱل ـ َّ‬
                                     ‫ـش ـ ْـرِخ‬                               ‫يـُ ـ َذ ِّك ـ ُـرِن َحـ ـ َ‬
                                                                      ‫ـال ٱلـ َّ‬
      ‫ٱلَـ ِـدي ــثَـ ِـة َوٱلْـ ـ َك ـ ْـرِخ‬
                                           ‫ـن ْ‬    ‫ـث لَــنَــا بَـ ـ ْ َ‬‫َح ـ ِـدي ـ ٌ‬



                                   ‫ني ِح َّجةً‬   ‫ِ‬               ‫فـ ُق ْل ِ ِ‬
                                              ‫ت لنـَْفسي بـَْع َد خَْس َ‬
                                                                       ‫َ ُ‬
      ‫ول ٱلتـََّف ُّك ِر َكٱ لْ َف ْر ِخ‬  ‫ت ِمن طُ ِ‬  ‫ر‬  ‫ص‬‫وقَ ْد ِ‬
                                                ‫ْ ُ ْ‬             ‫َ‬



                                           ‫ـاف س ـ ْل ـ ٍع وح ـ ِ‬
                                    ‫ـاجـ ـ ٍر‬   ‫تُـ ـ َذ ِّكـ ـ ُـرِن أَ ْكـ ــنَـ ـ َ َ َ َ‬
              ‫ـش ـبِ ـيــبَـ ِـة َوٱ ل ـ َّ‬
      ‫ـش ـ ْـرِخ‬                                  ‫َوتَـ ـ ْذ ُك ـ ُـر ِل َحـ ـ َ‬
                                         ‫ـال ٱ لـ َّ‬



                                  ‫َو َس ْوقِي ٱ لْ َمطَايَا ُمْن ِج ًد ا ُثَّ ُمْت ِه ًما‬
      ‫ـار ٱلْـ َـع ـ َفــا ِر َم ـ َـع ٱلْـ َـمـ ْـرِخ‬               ‫ِ‬
                                                   ‫َوقَ ـ ْدح ــي َل ـَـا نَـ َ‬




‫‪154‬‬
Fifty Years




Brought back to the prime
   of my life and youth
by words spoken
   between Hadītha and Karkh


After fifty years
   of hard thinking
I’ve become like
   a fledgling bird


Brought back to the folds
   of Splitrock and Hājir
back to the prime
   of my life and youth


When I led camels
   to Najd and Tihām
and lit for her a fire
   of flametree and markh




                               Fifty Years   155
                                                                            ‫‪33‬‬




                      ‫أُطَـ ـ ـ ــارِح ُكـ ـ َّـل ه ــاتِـ ـ َف ـ ٍـة بِـ ـأَي ـ ٍ‬
                      ‫ـك‬    ‫ْ‬                        ‫َ‬            ‫ُ‬
      ‫ـشــجـ ِ‬
      ‫ـون‬   ‫ُّ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ع ـلَــى فـ ــنَ ـ ٍن بِـ ـأَفـ ــنَ ـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـان‬
          ‫ُ‬                  ‫ْ‬                  ‫َ َ‬



                                                                       ‫ف ــتَــبـ ِ‬
                      ‫ـكــي إِلْـ َفـ َـهــا ِمـ ْـن َغ ـ ِْـر َد ْم ـ ٍع‬ ‫َْ‬
      ‫ٱلُْز ِن يـَْه ُم ُل ِم ْن ُج ُف ِون‬ ‫َو َد ْم ُع ْ‬



                        ‫ت ُج ُف ِون‬      ‫ول َلَا َوقَ ْد َسَ َح ْ‬ ‫أَقُ ُ‬
      ‫بِـ ـأ َْدم ــعِ ــه ــا ُتَـ ـب ـِّ ــر عـ ــن ُش ـ ــؤونِ‬
         ‫ُ َ ْ ُ‬                             ‫ُ َ‬



                      ‫َعـ ـْن ـ َـد ِك بِــٱلَّـ ِـذي أ َْه ـ ـ َـواهُ ِع ـ ْلـ ٌـم‬
                                                                                 ‫أِ‬
                     ‫وهـ ــل قَــالُ ـوا بـ ـأَفـ ــي ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاء ٱلْــغُــص ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـون‬ ‫ُ‬               ‫َ َْ‬                      ‫ََ ْ‬




‫‪156‬‬
Drowning Eyes




I trade cries
   with a dove
in a tangle thick
   with woe


Tearlessly she
   mourns
her only one
   as my eyes stream


I ask as my drown-­
   ing lashes reveal
the wreckage of
   my mind   What news


Do you have
   of those I love?
are they safe
   in branches’ shade?




                         Drowning Eyes   157
                                                                                ‫‪34‬‬




                         ‫ـال زر ِ‬
                         ‫ود‬      ‫ِ ِ ِ ِ‬                                         ‫ِ‬
                              ‫ع ـْنـ َـد ٱ لْ ـ ُك ـثـَـيِّــب م ـ ْـن ج ــبَـ َ ُ‬
                       ‫ِص ـي ـ ٌد وأُس ـ ـ ـ ـ ٌد ِمـ ــن ِل ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاظ ٱلْــغِ ـي ـ ِـد‬   ‫ْ َ‬                   ‫َ ْ‬



                     ‫ص ْر َعى َو ُه ْم أَبـْنَاءُ َم ْل َح َم ِة ٱ لْ َو َغى‬
                                                                           ‫َ‬
      ‫ـسـ ِ‬
      ‫ـود‬ ‫ُّ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ِ‬
                   ‫ـون‬‫ـ‬‫ـي‬‫ـ‬‫ـع‬‫ـ‬‫ل‬
                             ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـن‬‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫م‬  ‫ـود‬   ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ٱل‬
                                                 ‫ُس‬ ‫ْ‬    ‫ـن‬‫ـ‬ ‫َي‬
                                                              ‫أ‬
                       ‫ْ َ ُ ُ َ ُُ‬



               ‫ـت بِِـ ـ ْـم َلَ ـظَــاتـ ـُ ُـه ـ َّـن َو َحـ ـبَّـ ـ َذا‬
                                                                        ‫فَــتَ ـ َك ـ ْ‬
      ‫ٱلصيدِ‬ ‫ِ‬
         ‫ظ م ْن بـَنَات ِّ‬      ‫ِ‬        ‫ِ‬
                                  ‫ك ٱ لْ َم َل ح ُ‬                  ‫ِ‬
                                                             ‫ت ْل َ‬




‫‪158‬‬
Sweet the Gaze




Lions and other
  beasts of prey
touched by the glances
  of beautiful women


Smitten near Zarūd—
  these sons of carnage!
What are lions
  before dark eyes?


A glance took them
  by mortal surprise
Sweet the gaze
  of the hunter’s child




                           Sweet the Gaze   159
                                                                                               ‫‪35‬‬




               ‫ـدوٍر َم ـ ــا يـ ـُ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـز ُّن بِـ ـ ِزيـ ــنَـ ـ ٍـة‬          ‫ثَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـا ُ‬
                                                                         ‫ث بُ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫خــرجــن إِ َل ٱ لـت ـَّْنــعِـيـ ِم مــعــتـ ِـجــراتِ‬
         ‫ُ َْ َ‬                                                       ‫ََ ْ َ‬



               ‫ضاءَةً‬   ‫وس إِ َ‬‫ُّم ِ‬              ‫ِ‬
                                       ‫َح َس ْر َن َع َن ْٱمثَال ٱلش ُ‬
      ‫ـٱله ـ ـ َـا ِل م ــع ــت ـ ِـم ــر ِ‬
      ‫ات‬ ‫ُ َْ َ‬                        ‫ـن بِـ ـ ِْ ْ‬
                                                  ‫َولَـ ـ ـبـَّـ ـ ْ َ‬



              ‫ـن ٱل ـ ُّـرَويْ ـ َـدا َكـ ِـم ـثْـ ِـل َمــا‬  ‫ِ‬
                                                          ‫َوأَق ـْ ـب ـَـ ْل ـ َـن َيْــش ـ َ‬
      ‫ٱلـب ــر ِ‬
      ‫ات‬             ‫تََشَّى ٱ لْ َقطَا ِف أ ْ ِ‬
         ‫َلُف َْ ََ‬




‫‪160‬‬
You Now




Three moons needing
  no adornment
rose over Tanʿīm,
  faces veiled


Lowering the veils they
  glowed like the sun
I’m here for you now
  by the stations they chanted


They passed with a gait
  like that of sandgrouse,
skipping along
  in dappled gowns




                                 You Now   161
                                                                                                                      ‫‪36‬‬




                    ‫ـت ِمـ ـ ْـن َْن ـ ِـد‬
                                        ‫ـارْكـ ـ َ‬
                                                             ‫ٍ‬
                                               ‫أ ََل يَ ــا ثـَـ ـ َـرى َْن ـ ــد ت ـَــبَـ ـ َ‬
      ‫اب ٱ لْ ُم ْز ِن َج ْو ًد ا َعلَى َج ْو ِد‬
                                               ‫ك َس َح ُ‬          ‫َس َقْت َ‬




                            ‫ـن ِح ـ َّ‬
                        ‫ـج ـةً‬               ‫ـاك م ـ ــن أَح ـ ــي ـ ـ َ ِ‬
                                        ‫ـاك َخْـ ــسـ ـ َ‬        ‫َو َحـ ـ ـيَّ ـ ـ َ َ ْ ْ َ‬
      ‫بِـ ــع ـ ــو ٍد عـ ـلَ ــى ب ـ ـ ـ ْد ٍء وبـ ـ ـ ـ ْد ٍء عـ ـلَ ــى ع ـ ــودِ‬
        ‫َْ‬               ‫َ‬             ‫َ ْ َ َ ََ‬




                              ‫ـت إلَـ ـي ـْ ـ َـهـ ــا ُك ـ ـ َّـل قـَـ ـ ْف ـ ـ ٍر َوَمـ ـ ْـهـ ـ َـمـ ـ ٍـة‬
                                                                                                           ‫قَـ ـطَـ ـ ْـعـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ٱلَ ـ َـم ـ ِـل ٱلْـ َـع ـ ْـو ِد‬             ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫َع ـلَــى ٱل ـنَّــاقَـ ِـة ٱلْ ـ َك ـ ْـوَم ــاء َو ْ‬



                     ‫ٱلِ َمى‬
                          ‫ب ْ‬     ‫إِ َل أَ ْن ت ـَـراء ى ٱ لْبـَر ُق ِم ْن َجانِ ِ‬
                                                    ‫ْ‬         ‫ََ‬
      ‫وق ـ ـ ْد زادِن م ــس ــراه وج ـ ـ ًـد ا ع ـلَــى وج ــدِ‬
           ‫َ ََ َ َُْ َْ َ َْ‬




‫‪162‬‬
Lightning over Gháda




Earth of the highlands
   how blessed you are,
quenched by the gentle
   comfort of rains


He greets you again
   —long-­life greetings—
who has greeted you
   for fifty years


And always returns
   to the beginning
and always begins
   again to return


I’ve ridden through wastelands
   and empty quarters
on high-­humped mares
   or long-­toothed camels


Till evening’s flash
   over Híma
split me apart
   with longing




                                 Lightning over Gháda   163
                                                                              ‫‪37‬‬




                                          ‫يـَـا َخــلِـيـلَـ َّـي أَلِـ َّـمــا بِـ ْ‬
                                 ‫ـٱلِـ َـمــى‬
                           ‫َوٱ طْـلُــبَــا َْن ـ ًـد ا َو َذ َ‬
      ‫اك ٱ لْـ َـعـلَـ َـمــا‬



                                ‫ات ٱللِّ َوى‬  ‫و ِرد ا مــاء ِبيم ِ‬
                                                     ‫َ َ َ ً َْ َ‬
      ‫ـس ـلَـ َـمــا‬ ‫ـ‬‫ل‬ ‫وٱ‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ض‬   ‫َّ‬
                                        ‫ـا‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                              ‫ـظ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـت‬‫ـ‬
                                                  ‫ٱس َ‬
                  ‫َّ‬         ‫َ ََ‬                     ‫َو ْ‬



                              ‫ىن‬ ‫ِ ِ‬                         ‫ِ‬ ‫ِ‬
                              ‫فَإ َذ ا َما جْئتُ َما َواد ي م ً‬
      ‫فَــٱ لَّـ ِـذ ي ق ـَ ْلـِـي بِـ ِـه قَـ ْد ِجْئتُ َما‬



                                                ‫أَبــلِــغَــا عـ ِّـي َِت ـيَّـ ِ‬
                                  ‫ـات ٱ ْلـَ َـوى‬                 ‫ْ َ‬
      ‫ُك ـ َّـل َم ـ ْـن َح ـ َّـل بِـ ِـه أ َْو َسـلَّـ َـمــا‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                      ‫ٱسَـ َـع ــا َمـ ــا َذا ُِي ـي ــبُــو َن بِـ ِـه‬
                                                                         ‫َو ْ‬
         ‫ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬
                        ‫َخِبا َعن َد ن ِ‬
           ‫ف ٱ لْ َق ْل ِ‬
      ‫ب بَا‬                         ‫َوأ ْ َ ْ‬




‫‪164‬‬
Come Down to the Waters




Pass by al-­Híma,
   friends, in search
of Najd and its
   lonesome waymark


Come down to the waters
   at Twisting Sands
down to the lote shade
   and absinthe


When you reach
   Mína’s valley
you’ll be in the place
   that holds my heart


To all who arrive
   bring greetings
and blessings of peace
   on my behalf


Hearken to each                                        [5]
   report that reaches you
and tell in turn
   of a haggard man




                             Come Down to the Waters   165
                             ‫ي ْشت ِك ِيه ِمن صباب ِ‬
                   ‫ات ٱ ْلََوى‬    ‫ْ ََ َ‬       ‫َ َ‬
          ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬             ‫ِ‬
      ‫ُم ْعلنًا ُم ْستَ ْخ ًبا ُم ْستـَْفه َما‬




‫‪166‬‬
Who opens his heart
  and pleads for a word,
asking only
  why . . . why




                           Come Down to the Waters   167
                                                                                            ‫‪38‬‬




                                                                            ‫ـب بِـ ـ َـا ِد ِ‬
                                         ‫ٱهلل ِل بـَـ ْـع ـ َـد طَـ ْـيــبَـ ٍـة‬           ‫َحـ ـ ُّ‬
                                                                                                 ‫أَ‬
      ‫ومـ ـ َّـك ـ ـةَ و ْٱلَقْـ ـ ــصـ ـ ــى م ـ ِـدي ــنَـ ـةُ بـ ـ ـ ْغـ ـ َـدانِ‬
                     ‫َ‬                       ‫َ َ‬                          ‫َ‬       ‫ََ‬



                                 ‫ـسـاَ َم َوِل ِبـَـا‬                        ‫ِ‬
                                                     ‫ـال َل أ َْه ـ َـوى ٱلـ َّ‬
                                                                            ‫َوَم ـ َ‬
      ‫ـدى ِديـ ـ ِـي َو َعـ ـ ْق ـ ِـدي َوإِميَـ ـ ِـان‬     ‫إِ َم ـ ـ ٌ‬
                                                    ‫ـام َهـ ـ َ‬



                               ‫ـات فَــا ِر ٍس‬‫وقَـ ْد س َكنَتـها ِمــن ب ـن ـيَّـ ِ‬
                                                        ‫َ َ َْ ْ ُ َ‬
      ‫ـض ـ ـةُ أَجـ ـ ـ َف ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـان‬                       ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ر‬
                                    ‫ي‬‫ِ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫م‬ ‫لَـ ـط ـ ـيِـ ـ َف ـ ـةُ إِمي ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍ‬
                                             ‫ـاء‬
                    ‫َ َ َ ْ‬



                  ‫ت بِلَ ْح ِظ َها‬
                                 ‫ُتَ ِّي فـَتُ ْحيِي َم ْن َأما تَ ْ‬
      ‫ت ِبسن بـع َد حس ٍن وإِحس ِ‬
      ‫ان‬ ‫فَ َجاءَ ْ ُ ْ َ َْ ُ ْ َ ْ َ‬




‫‪168‬‬
A Persian Girl




After Medina,
   Mecca and Jerusalem,
Baghdad’s God’s city
   I love the most


Why wouldn’t I
   love that city
of peace   My imām’s
   there to guide me


There lives a girl
   a Persian pearl
of delicate gesture
   and languid eye


Who kills with a glance
   then revives with a word
tempering fierce beauty
   with compassion




                              A Persian Girl   169
                                                                                                    ‫‪39‬‬




                           ‫ب‬‫ـض ُخ ـ َّـرٍد عُ ــر ٍ‬
                                    ‫ُ‬                         ‫نـَـ ْفـ ِـســي ٱلْ ـ ِـف ـ َـداءُ لَـبِـيـ ٍ‬
      ‫ـجـ ـ ِر‬   ‫ـن ِب ِعـ ـْن ـ َـد لَـ ـثْـ ـ ِم ٱ لـ ـ ُّـرْك ـ ـ ِن ْ‬
            ‫وٱلَ ـ َ‬
                                                                                ‫ِ‬
                                                                          ‫لَ ــع ـ ْ َ‬



                                                             ‫ِ‬                              ‫ِ‬
                                                        ‫َم ــا تَـ ْـس ــتَــد ُّل إِ َذ ا َم ــا تْ ـ َ‬
                                 ‫ـت َخ ـ ْل ـ َفـ ُـهـ ُـم‬
                           ‫إِ َّل بِـ ـ ـ ِر ِحيـ ـ ـ ِه ـ ــم ِم ـ ـ ـ ْـن طَـ ـ ـيِّ ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـب ْٱلَثَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِر‬                            ‫ْ‬



                                ‫ب لَـ ـ ْـيـ ـ ٌـل َم ـ ــا بِ ـ ـ ِـه قَ ـ َـم ـ ٌـر‬
                                                                                    ‫َوَل َد َجـ ـ ــا ِ َ‬
                                              ‫ِ‬
                                ‫إِ َّل ذَ َكـ ـ ـ ْـرت ـُـ ـ ُـهـ ـ ـ ُـم فَـ ــس ـ ـ ْـر ُ‬
      ‫ت ِف ٱ لْـ ـ َق ـ َـمـ ـ ِر‬



                        ‫ـن أ َْم ـ ـ ِـش ـ ــي ِف ِرَكـ ـ ــابِِـ ـ ـ ُـم‬    ‫ِ‬
                                                                       ‫َوإِ َّنَـ ـ ـ ــا ح ـ ـ َ‬
      ‫س ِف ٱ لْبُ َك ِر‬
                      ‫َّم ِ‬                     ‫فَٱللَّيل ِعْن ِد ِ‬
                           ‫ي مثْ ُل ٱلش ْ‬         ‫َ‬                 ‫ُْ‬



                                       ‫َغ ــازلْ ــت ِم ــن َغـ ــزِل ِم ـن ــه ـ َّـن و ِ‬
                            ‫اح ـ ـ َـدةً‬
‫]‪[5‬‬
                                          ‫َ ُ ْ َ ُْ َ‬
      ‫ـش ـ ِر‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـب‬‫ـ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ـن‬‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                          ‫م‬ ‫ـت‬
           ‫ـس َلَــا ْ ٌ َ َ َ‬    ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ُخ‬‫أ‬
                  ‫ْ‬                                ‫َح ـ ْـس ــنَــاءَ لَـ ْـي ـ َ‬




‫‪170‬‬
Day Falls Night




I’d give all I am
   for those ravishing girls
who teased me where
   we kissed the stone


When you lose yourself
   in their wake
a fragrant trace
   on the wind will guide you


When moonless night
   drags dark upon me
I recall them and walk
   bathed in light


When I ride with them
   in the falling dark
my night shines
   like the rising sun


I whispered love                                  [5]
   to one of them,
a beauty far
   beyond compare




                                Day Falls Night   171
                          ‫ـك َسنًا‬    ‫ـاهــا أ ََرتْـ َ‬     ‫ت َعـ ْـن ُمَـيَّـ َ‬                     ‫إِ ْن أ ْ‬
                                                                                         ‫َس ـ َفـ َـر ْ‬
      ‫ِم ـ ـثْـ ـ َـل ٱلْـ ــغَـ ـزالَـ ـ ِـة إِ ْشـ ـ ـ َـراقًـ ـ ــا بِـ ـ َـا ِغـ ـ َِـر‬



                 ‫ـس غُـ ـ َّـرت ـُـ َـهـ ــا لِـ ـلَّ ـ ْـي ـ ِـل طُ ـ َّـرتـُـ َـه ــا‬        ‫لِـ ـل ـ َّ‬
                                                                                     ‫ـش ـ ْـم ـ ِ‬
      ‫ٱلص َو ِر‬
            ‫ب ُّ‬‫َع َج ِ‬   ‫س َولَْي ٌل َم ًعا ِم ْن أ ْ‬                    ‫َشْ ٌ‬



                  ‫ض ـ ْـوِء ٱل ـن ـَّ َـهــا ِر بِـ ِـه‬
                                                      ‫ـحـ ُـن بِــٱلـلَّـ ْـيـ ِـل ِف َ‬
                                                                                     ‫ف ـَـنَـ ْ‬
                  ‫ِ‬
         ‫ون ُن ِف ٱلظُّ ْه ِر ِف لَْي ٍل م َن ٱلش َ‬
      ‫َّع ِر‬                                                  ‫َْ‬




‫‪172‬‬
When she opens her veil
   her face shines—
Sunblaze—lighting
   unfading sky


Strands of hair
   along her forehead—
sun by night, in-
   explicable


By night the light
   of day in her shines
By day night falls
   with the dark of her hair




                               Day Falls Night   173
                                                                        ‫‪40‬‬




                                   ‫ٍ‬
                        ‫ـن أَ ْذ ِر َع ــات َوبـُ ْ‬
                  ‫ـصـ َـرى‬                                ‫طَـلَـ َـعـ ْ‬
                                                 ‫ـت ب ـَ ْ َ‬
      ‫ل بَـ ْد َرا‬‫ِ‬                ‫ٍ‬         ‫بِـْنـ ُ‬
                 ‫ـت َعـ ْشـر َوأ َْربَـ ـ ٍع َ‬



                   ‫ان َجالَالً‬‫ٱلزم ِ‬
                                   ‫ت َعلَى َّ َ‬    ‫قَ ْد تـََعا لَ ْ‬
               ‫ِ‬            ‫ِ‬
      ‫ت َع ْليه فَ ْخًرا َوكـب ـَْـرا‬    ‫َوتَ َس َ‬
                                       ‫ام ْ‬



                                    ‫ُك ـ ُّـل بَـ ـ ْد ٍر إِ َذ ا تَــنَـ َ‬
               ‫ـاه ــى َك ـ َـم ــا الً‬
      ‫ْم َل َش ْهَرا‬          ‫جــاء ه نـ ْق ِ‬
                   ‫صهُ ليَك ُ‬    ‫َ َُ َ ُ‬



                  ‫ـات‬                                        ‫ِ‬
                     ‫َغ ـيـْـ ُـر ٰه ــذي فَـ َـمــا َلَــا َح ـ َـرَك ـ ٌ‬
      ‫ـشـ ِّـفـ ُـع ِوتـْـ َـرا‬               ‫ِف ب ـُـ ُـر ٍ‬
                             ‫وج فَـ َـمــا تُـ َ‬



                    ‫ـرا َونـَ ـ ْش ـ ًـرا‬     ‫ُود َع ـ ـ ـ ْ ِ‬‫ح ـ َّـقـ ـةٌ أ ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬
                                       ‫ـت َعـ ـب ـ ً‬                          ‫ُ‬
      ‫ـت َربِـيـ ًـعــا َوَزْه ـ َـرا‬   ‫ـ‬ ‫ـت‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـب‬‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬
                                     ‫َ ْ َ ٌ َْ َ ْ‬‫َ‬‫أ‬ ‫ة‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ض‬‫و‬‫ر‬




‫‪174‬‬
Odd to Even




Between Adhriʿāt
   and Búsra she appeared,
a girl of fourteen,
   full moon rising


In pride and glory
   she surpasses
the ebb and flow
   of time itself


Every moon
   when it waxes full
must wane again
   to complete its turn


But this moon runs
   through no constellations
and knows no doubling
   from odd to even


It’s you who bring                           [5]
   each sweet fragrance
you, who give the
   spring its blossom




                               Odd to Even   175
                                   ‫إِنـتـهى ْ ِ ِ‬
               ‫صى َم َد اهُ‬ ‫ٱلُ ْس ُن فيك أَقْ َ‬ ‫ْ ََ‬
      ‫ُخَرى‬‫أ‬ ‫ِ‬
             ‫ك‬ ‫ُ‬‫ل‬‫ـ‬‫ث‬ ‫ان ِ‬
                    ‫م‬   ‫ٱل م َك ِ‬
                               ‫ِ‬‫ْ‬  ‫ع‬‫ِ‬ ‫س‬‫و‬‫ِ‬‫ب‬ ‫ا‬‫م‬
         ‫ْ‬       ‫ْ‬           ‫ْ‬        ‫َ ُْ‬




‫‪176‬‬
Beauty in you
  has become complete
There’s none like you
  in creation




                        Odd to Even   177
                                                                                           ‫‪41‬‬




                    ‫َر َع ـ ـ ــى ٱهللُ طَ ـ ـيـْـ ـ ًـرا َعـ ـلَ ــى بَ ــا نَ ـ ٍـة‬
      ‫ٱلَبـَْر‬ ‫ص ِح ِ‬
            ‫يح ْ‬    ‫ص َح ِل َع ْن َ‬             ‫قَ َد ٱ فْ َ‬



                                                                              ‫َن ْٱل ِ‬
                           ‫َح ـ ـ ـ ـبَّـ ـ ـ ـةَ َشـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُّـدوا َعـ ـلَ ــى‬    ‫بِـ ـ ـ ـ ـأ َّ‬
                                                          ‫ِ ِ‬
      ‫ـح ـ ْـر‬               ‫َرَواح ـ ــلـ ـ ـ ِه ـ ـ ْـم ُثَّ َر ُ‬
            ‫اح ـ ـ ـ ـوا َس ـ َ‬


                                     ‫َجلِ ِه ْم‬‫ب م ْن أ ْ‬
                                                                  ‫فَ ِسرت وِف ٱ لْ َق ْل ِ ِ‬
                                                                                           ‫ْ ُ َ‬
             ‫ِ‬                            ‫ِ‬    ‫ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
      ‫َج ـ ــحـ ـ ـي ـ ـ ٌـم ل ـ ـبَـ ـ ْـي ـ ــن ـ ـه ـ ـ ُـم تَـ ـ ْـسـ ــتَـ ــعـ ـ ْـر‬


                                                          ‫ِ‬                            ‫ِ‬
                                 ‫ُّج ــى‬   ‫أُتَ ــا ب ــعُ ـ ُـه ـ ْـم ِف ظَـ ـ ـ َـا م ٱ ل ــد َ‬
      ‫أُنـ ـ ـ ـاَ ِد ي بِِ ـ ـ ْـم ُثَّ أَق ـْ ـ ـ ُف ـ ــو ْٱلَثـَـ ـ ـ ـ ْـر‬




‫]‪[5‬‬                             ‫َوَم ـ ــا ِل َد لِـ ـيـ ـ ٌـل َعـ ـلَ ــى إِثْـ ـ ـ ِرِه ـ ـ ْـم‬
      ‫ـس ِم ـ ْـن َه ـ َـو ُاه ـ ْـم َعـ ِـطـ ْـر‬      ‫ِس ـ َـوى نـَـ َف ـ ٍ‬




‫‪178‬‬
My Only Guide




God save that bird
high in a moringa


who called out the news
sharp and clear


that those I loved
had cinched their saddles


and set off by camel
at the break of dawn


leaving me, heart
afire, in their wake


In the moonless dark
I raced in pursuit


calling after,
close on their traces


tracking and tracking—                      [5]
my only guide


a fragrant breath
on the wind of desire




                            My Only Guide   179
                            ‫ٱلد َجى‬  ‫َضــاءَ ُّ‬  ‫ٱلس َج َ‬
                                             ‫اف أ َ‬        ‫َرف ـَ ْـعـ َـن ِّ‬
       ‫ـض ـ ْـوِء ٱلْـ َقـ َـمـ ْـر‬ ‫فَــس ــار ٱل ــرَك ـ ِ‬
                                 ‫ـاب ل ـ َ‬
                                       ‫َ َ ِّ ُ‬



                                ‫ـت َد ْمــعِــي أَم ــام ٱلـ ِّـرَكـ ِ‬
                              ‫ـاب‬                                   ‫فَـأ َْر َس ـ ْلـ ُ‬
                                              ‫َ َ‬
                                   ‫فـَـ َقــالُـوا َم ـ َـى َس ـ َ‬
       ‫ـال ٰه ـ َذا ٱل ـن ـَّ َـهـ ْـر‬




                           ‫ـت‬                                           ‫ِ‬
                            ‫ـورا فـَـ ُق ـ ْل ـ ُ‬‫َو َلْ يَـ ْـســتَــط ـيــعُ ـوا عُ ــبُ ـ ً‬
       ‫ـوع ـ ــي َج ـ ـ َـريْـ ـ َـن ِبٰ ـ ـ ـ َذ ا ِد َرْر‬ ‫دمـ ـ ِ‬
                                                                  ‫ُُ‬




                          ‫َن ٱلـ ـ ُّـرعـ ــود لِ ـلَــم ـ ِع ٱلْـ ـب ـ ــر ِ‬
                         ‫وق‬  ‫ُُ‬                ‫َك ـ ـأ َّ ُ َ ْ‬
                                 ‫ِ‬
                        ‫وس ـي ـْـر ٱلْــغَــمـ ِـام لــصــو ِ‬
       ‫ب ٱلْـ َـمـطَـ ْـر‬  ‫َْ‬             ‫ََ َ َ‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                                                     ‫وِج ـيــب ٱلْـ ُق ـلُـ ِ‬
                          ‫ـوب لِـب ـَ ْـرِق ٱلـث ـُّـغُــوِر‬            ‫َ ُ‬
                    ‫ـوع لِــرْك ـ ٍ‬
       ‫ـب نـَـ َفـ ْـر‬           ‫ِ‬       ‫ـ‬  ‫ـد‬
                                           ‫ُّم‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬  ‫ـب‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ك‬
                                                           ‫ْ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫س‬‫و‬
                           ‫ََ ُ ُ َ‬




‫‪180‬‬
When they lowered their veils
they lit the dark—


flooding the riders
in a sudden full moon


My tears rained down,
blocking the way


Since when, they asked,
does a river run here?


The tears, I say—
as they seek


and fail to cross it—
are endless   As


if the thunder
and lightning flares


and clouds roiling
in the pouring rain


were hearts beating,                            [10]
the flash of a smile

and a burst of tears
for those gone away




                                My Only Guide   181
                    ‫ف ــيــا م ــن يــشـبِّــه لِــن ٱلْ ـ ُقـ ُـد ِ‬
                    ‫ود‬               ‫ََ َ ْ ُ َ ُ َ‬
      ‫َّض ْر‬   ‫ٱلر ِط ِ‬
         ‫يب ٱلن ِ‬   ‫َّ‬    ‫يب‬‫ِ‬      ‫ِ‬
                                   ‫ض‬          ‫بِلِ ِ‬
                                      ‫ني ٱ لْ َق‬



                                      ‫س ْٱل َْمَر ِمثْ َل ٱلَّ ِذي‬        ‫َولَ ْو َع َك َ‬
      ‫ـت لَـ ـ َك ــا َن َس ــلِ ـي ـ َـم ٱل ـنَّ ـظَـ ْـر‬
                                                        ‫فـَـ َـعـ ـ ْل ـ ُ‬


                                                           ‫فَــلِــن ٱلْــغُــصـ ِ‬
                                                ‫ـون لِــلِـ ِ‬
                                 ‫ن ٱلْـ ُقـ ُـد ِ‬
                                 ‫ود‬                             ‫ُ‬        ‫ُ‬
      ‫ٱلـَ ـ َف ـ ْـر‬ ‫ِ‬           ‫ِ‬  ‫َوَوْر ُد ٱ لـ ـ ِّـريَـ ـ ِ‬
                   ‫ـاض لـ ـ ـ ـ َـوْرد ْ‬




‫‪182‬‬
You who liken
the lover’s cheek


to the dewy softness
of a new spring bough


turn it around
as I’ve done and you’ll see


a bough’s pliant
as a lover’s limbs


Blush red’s
the garden rose




                              My Only Guide   183
                                                                                                         ‫‪42‬‬




                                                 ‫ُول ْٱلَلْب ِ‬
                         ‫اب يَا أ َْه َل ٱلنـَُّهى‬          ‫يَا أ ِ‬
                                                   ‫َ‬
                         ‫ِهــت مــا بِــن ٱلْــمــهـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاة َوٱلْـ َـمـ َـهــا‬ ‫ْ ُ َ َْ َ َ‬



                                            ‫َمـ ْـن َسـ َـهــا َعـ ِن ٱ لْـ ُّ‬
                  ‫ـسـ َـهــا فَـ َـمــا َس َها‬
                   ‫ِ‬
      ‫َم ْن َس َها َع ِن ٱ لْ َم َهاة قَ ْد َس َها‬



                    ‫ِسـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْـر بِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـه بِـ ـ ـ ِـسـ ـ ـ ْـربِـ ـ ـ ِـه لِـ ـ ـ ِـسـ ـ ـ ْـربِـ ـ ـ ِـه‬
      ‫ـٱلَـ ْـمـ ِـد ٱللَّ َهى‬ ‫ـح بِـ ْ‬       ‫فَٱللُّ َهى ت ـَ ْفــتَـ ُ‬



                        ‫ب‬               ‫إِنـَّـ ـ ــه ـ ـ ــا ِمـ ـ ــن ف ـ ـ ـتـ ـ ــي ـ ـ ٍ‬
                          ‫ـات عُـ ـ ــر ٍ‬
                              ‫ُ‬               ‫ْ َ ََ‬                            ‫َ‬
      ‫َصـاً إِن ـَّ َـهــا‬  ‫أ‬   ‫س‬‫ِ‬   ‫ر‬ ‫ف‬‫ْ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                             ‫ـات‬     ‫ـ‬ ‫ـن‬
                                                        ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬  ‫ن‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                               ‫م‬
                        ‫ْ‬            ‫ُْ‬               ‫ْ ََ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                               ‫ٱلُـ ـ ْـسـ ـ ُـن ِم ـ ـ َـن ٱل ـ ـ ــد ِّ‬
                           ‫ُّر َلَــا‬                                     ‫نـَ ـظَ ـ َـم ْ‬
                             ‫ٍ‬
      ‫صــاف َكــٱلْـ َـمـ َـهــا‬  ‫ـض َ‬      ‫أَ ْشــنَــبًــا أَبْــيَـ َ‬




‫‪184‬‬
Sign Masters




Wise ones! Sign-­
   masters! I wander,
dazed, between
   Onyx and Oryx


Distracted, he
   who can’t see the sun,
not Súha, that faint
   horizon spark


Take him to offer
   his heart for his herd
Oblations open
   the throat in praise


She’s an Arab
   beauty and yet
pure Persian
   she is as well


Beauty composed her                        [5]
   a harmony in pearl,
her teeth gleaming
   clear as crystal




                            Sign Masters   185
                                  ‫اع ـ ـ ِـي‬                                  ‫ِ‬
                                          ‫ـور َر َ‬ ‫َرابَ ـ ـ ِـي م ـنـْـ َـه ــا ُسـ ـ ُف ـ ٌ‬
       ‫ـال َوِبـَ ـ ــا‬
                    ‫ِعـ ـ ـْن ـ ـ َـدهُ ِم ـ ـن ـْ ـ َـهـ ــا َجَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٌ‬



                             ‫ـن ِمـن ـْ ُـهـ َـمــا‬
                                                  ‫فَـأَنَــا ذُو ٱ لْــم ــوتـَـت ـَ ْ ِ‬
                                                              ‫َْ‬
       ‫ٰهـ ـ َكـ ـ َذا ٱلْ ـ ـ ُقـ ـ ُـرآ ُن قَـ ـ ْد َجـ ــاءَ ِبَــا‬



                                 ‫ـال ُس ـ ُف ــوٍر َرابَـ ِـي‬               ‫قـُـ ْل ـ ُ‬
                                                               ‫ـت َم ــا بَـ ُ‬
                        ‫َمـ ْـو ِعـ ُـد ْٱلَقـْـ ـ َـو ِام إِ ْش ـ َـر ُ‬
       ‫اق ٱلْـ َـمـ َـهــا‬



                                  ‫اح ٍم‬  ‫قـ ْلت إِ ِّن ِف ِحى ِمن فَ ِ‬
                                                     ‫ً ْ‬                            ‫ُ ُ‬
                         ‫ِ‬ ‫ِ‬         ‫ِ‬    ‫ِ‬                              ‫ِ‬
       ‫َس ـ ــاتـ ـ ـ ٍر فـَـ ـ ْل ـ ـت ـُـ ْـرسـ ــل ـ ـيـ ــه عـ ـْن ـ َـد َه ــا‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                       ‫ِشـ ـ ْـعـ ـ ُـرنـَ ــا ٰه ـ ـ ـ َذا بِـ ـ ـ َـا قَـ ــافِـ ــيَـ ـ ٍـة‬
             ‫ي ِم ـْن ــهُ َح ـ ـ ْـر ُ‬
       ‫ف َهــا‬                                   ‫إَِّنَـ ــا قَ ـ ِ‬
                                           ‫ـص ــد َ‬  ‫ْ‬



                          ‫َجلِ َها‬         ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬
                                  ‫َغَرضي لَ ْفظَةُ َها مـ ْـن أ ْ‬
       ‫ت أ َْه َوى ٱ لْبـَْي َع إِالَّ َها َو َها‬
                                                ‫لَ ْس ُ‬


‫‪186‬‬
She lowered her veil
   and a fearsome beauty
drew me toward her
   yet held me back


I’m the one
   with two deaths to die,
both told here
   in this Qur’an


Frightened by
   a lowered veil?
A battlefield’s
   a rising sun


My sanctuary,
   I said, is night’s
black curtain
   So let it fall


These verses have                           [10]
   no rhyme, the sound
of her’s their only
   aspiration


She is the sign,
   the signification
Her for her’s
   my only offer


                             Sign Masters   187
                                                                                          ‫‪43‬‬




                        ‫ـس يـَـ ْـوًم ــا ِع ـْن ـ َـد َوا نَـ ـ ـةَ َم ـْن ـ ِزِل‬
                                                                                ‫َوَل أَنْـ ـ َ‬
      ‫ـن ون ـ ـ ـ ـ َّـزلِ‬       ‫ِ‬   ‫ِ‬                       ‫ِ‬
                                                 ‫وق ـَـ ـ ـ ــوِل لـ ــرْكـ ـ ٍ‬
                  ‫ـب َرائ ـ ــح ـ ـ َ َ ُ‬               ‫َ ْ َ‬



                         ‫ـاعـ ـةً نَـ ْشــتَـ ِـفــي ِبَــا‬                                   ‫ِ‬
                                                        ‫أَق ـي ـ ُـم ـوا َع ـلَ ـيْــنَــا َس ـ َ‬
                                    ‫فَـ ـ ـِإ ِّن َوَم ـ ـ ْـن أ َْه ـ ـ َـو ُ‬
      ‫اه ـ ـ ُـم ِف تـَـ َـع ـلُّـ ِـل‬



                  ‫ـاروا بِـ ـ ـأ َْيـَـ ـ ِن طَ ــائـِ ـ ٍر‬                             ‫ِ‬
                                                        ‫فَـ ـ ـ ـإ ْن َر َح ـ ـلُـ ـوا َسـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـب َمـْنـ ِزِل‬
                  ‫ـصـ ِ‬  ‫َخـ َ‬  ‫َوإِ ْن ن ـَ َـزلُـوا َحـلُّـوا بِـأ ْ‬



                      ‫لَـ ِـقـيـت ـُ ُـهـ ْـم‬   ‫ـب ِمــن و ِاد ي ق ــنَـ ٍ‬
                                                ‫ـاة‬  ‫َ‬          ‫ْ َ‬
                                                                        ‫ـشـ ْـعـ ِ‬
                                                                                ‫َوبِــٱ لـ ِّ‬
      ‫ٱلنـََقا َوٱ لْ ُم َشلَّ ِل‬               ‫ي‬         ‫ِ ِِ‬
                                                ‫َو َع ْهد ي ب ْم بـَْ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                            ‫س َحْي ُ‬
                 ‫ث َو َج ْد نَهُ‬            ‫يـَُراعُو َن َم ْر َعى ٱ لْعِْي ِ‬
      ‫ضلَّ ِل‬
            ‫ب ُم َ‬ ‫ص ٍّ‬ ‫ـب َ‬                          ‫َولَْي َ‬
                              ‫س ي ـَُـراعُـوا ق ـَْلـ َ‬




‫‪188‬‬
Parting’s Hour




I’ll never forget
Camp Wân and my word
to the riders leading
my love away


Stay a while
for by my love!
I need some respite
and time to heal


If they ride, let it be
with fortune
If they halt, let it be
on fertile land


I met them in Qánat
valley and stayed
with them from
Náqa to Arroyo


They tend to roans                         [5]
grazing the pasture
but not to a lover
dazed and lost




                          Parting’s Hour   189
                             ‫ال ِرفـًْقا َعلَى فـًَت‬     ‫َجَ ِ‬  ‫ي ْٱل ْ‬      ‫ِ‬
                                                                           ‫فـَيَا َحاد َ‬
                            ‫ت ـ ــراه لَ ـ َـدى ٱل ـت ـَّـو ِدي ـ ِع َك ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاس ـ َـر َح ـْن ـظَـ ِـل‬             ‫ْ‬                     ‫ََُ‬



                                     ‫ـن َعـلَــى ْ‬    ‫احـت ـَ ْ ِ‬                        ‫ِ‬
                                 ‫ٱلَـ َ‬
                              ‫ـشــا‬                              ‫ـن ٱلـ َّـر َ‬         ‫ُيَــالـ ُ‬
                                                                              ‫ـف ب ـَ ْ َ‬
      ‫ـسـ ِّـكـ ُـن قـَـ ْل ــبًــا طَـ ـاََر ِم ـ ْـن ِص ـ ِّـر َْمـ َـمـ ِـل‬
                                                                            ‫يُـ َ‬



                                 ‫صا بِ ٍر‬
                                        ‫َســى َغـي ـُْـر َ‬‫صـب ـًْـرا َو ْٱل َ‬   ‫ي ـَ ُقــولُــو َن َ‬
                                             ‫فَـ َـم ــا ِح ـي ـلَـ ِـي َوٱل ـ َّ‬
      ‫ـصـ ـبـْـ ُـر َعـ ـ ِّـي ِبَـ ْـعـ ـ ِزِل‬



                   ‫ـت ِبُـ ْكـ ِـمـ ِـه‬                    ‫َولَـ ْـو َك ــا َن ِل َ‬
                                     ‫ص ـب ـْ ٌـر َوُك ـْنـ ُ‬
      ‫س ِل‬                           ‫ِ‬
                  ‫ت نـَْفسي فَ َكْي َ‬
         ‫ف َولَْي َ‬                             ‫صبـََر ْ‬ ‫لَ َما َ‬




‫‪190‬‬
Have mercy, driver,
on a young man
splitting bittergourd
at parting’s hour


One hand he clutches
to his chest
The other calms
a heart tearing free


As the saddle groans
Patience! they say,
but grief knows not
what this means


And if I’d ever
been under its sway
I’d have lost it
So what of me now?




                        Parting’s Hour   191
                                                                        ‫‪44‬‬




                   ‫طَـلَـ َـع ٱ لْــبَـ ْد ُر ِف ُد َجــى ٱلش َ‬
                ‫َّع ِر‬
      ‫ٱلََو ِر‬
            ‫س ْ‬     ‫ِ‬
               ‫َو َس َقى ٱ لْـ َـوْرَد نـَْرج ُ‬



                          ‫ـسـ ــا ُن ِبَــا‬  ‫ـت ِْ‬
                                         ‫ٱلـ ـ َ‬
                                                      ‫َغ ـ ـ ــادةٌ تَ ــاه ـ ِ‬
                                                           ‫َ َ‬
      ‫ـورَه ــا َع ـلَــى ٱلْ ـ َق ـ َـم ـ ِر‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ن‬
                                          ‫َََ ُ ُ‬ ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ه‬‫ز‬‫و‬



                                    ‫ِه ــي أَس ــى ِم ــن ٱلْــم ــه ـ ِ‬
                          ‫ـاة َســنًــا‬     ‫َ ْ َ َ ََ‬
      ‫ـصـ َـو ِر‬
              ‫ُّ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـٱ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬      ‫ـورةٌ َل ُ َ ُ‬
                               ‫ـاس‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ق‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ت‬      ‫صـ ـ َ‬
                                                        ‫ُ‬



                               ‫َخَـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـص ـ َـه ــا‬  ‫ـك ٱ لـ ـنُّــو ِر ُد و َن أ ْ‬
                                                               ‫ف ـَـلَ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ِج َع ـ ِن ْٱلُ َكـ ـ ِر‬                     ‫تَـ ُ‬
                                ‫ـاجـ َـهــا َخـ ــار ٌ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                                  ‫ت ِف ٱلض ِ‬
                    ‫َّم ِري َْيَر ُح َها‬         ‫إِ ْن َسَر ْ‬
                                            ‫ِ‬
         ‫ف بِٱ لْبَ َ‬
      ‫ص ِر‬                                ‫ٰذ ل َ‬
                     ‫ك ٱ لْ َو ْه ُم َكْي َ‬




‫‪192‬‬
Chimera




A full moon rises
   in the dark of her hair
Her eyes, black narcissi,
   moisten the rose


Other beauties
   in her flowering vanish
Her light darkens
   the light of the moon


More beautiful than
   all gazelles is she,
a form beyond
   all measure and form


The sphere of light
   turns at her feet
Her diadem gleams
   beyond the stars


If thought’s whisper                   [5]
   might wound her
harsher still
   would be the gaze




                             Chimera   193
                             ‫لُـ ـ ْـعـ ــبَـ ـةٌ ِذ ْك ـ ـ ـ ُـرنَـ ـ ــا يُـ ـ َذ ِّوب ـُ ـ َـه ـ ــا‬
       ‫ـس ــارِِح ٱلـنَّـظَـ ِر‬
                             ‫ـت َع ـ ْـن َم ـ َ‬          ‫لَـطُـ َفـ ْ‬



                        ‫ـت أَ ْن ي ـُب ـَي ـِّن ـَ َـهــا‬                     ‫طَـلَـ َ‬
                                                             ‫ـب ٱ لـن ـَّ ْـعـ ُ‬
       ‫ـص ـ ِر‬         ‫ـت فـَـ َـع ـ َ‬
            ‫ـاد َذ ا َحـ َ‬                     ‫ف ـَـتـَـ َـع ــا لَ ـ ْ‬



                            ‫َو إِ َذ ا َرا َم أَ ْن يُ ـ َك ـيـِّـ َف ـ َـه ــا‬
       ‫ـص ـاً َعـلَــى ْٱلَثَ ـ ِر‬       ‫ِ‬
                                ‫َلْ يـَـ َـزْل نـَـاكـ َ‬



                                      ‫اح ٱ لْـ َـمـ ِـطـ َّـي طَــالِـب ـُ َـهــا‬         ‫ِ‬
                                                                               ‫إ ْن أ ََر َ‬
       ‫َلْ يُـ ـ ِرحيُ ـ ـوا َم ـ ِـطـ ـيَّـ ـةَ ٱ لْ ـ ِـفـ ـ َكـ ـ ِر‬



‫]‪[10‬‬                        ‫ب ِبَا‬     ‫ُش َّ‬‫روحنَت ُك َّل من أ ِ‬
                                                   ‫َْ‬                ‫َْ َ ْ‬
       ‫ـش ـ ِر‬         ‫ِ‬   ‫ِ‬
            ‫ن ـَـ ْقـ ـلَـ ـةً َعـ ـ ْـن َمـ ـ َـراتـ ــب ٱلْــبَـ َ‬



                       ‫ـاب َرائِـ ُق ـ َـه ــا‬ ‫َغـ ـيـْـ َـرًة أَ ْن يُـ َ‬
                                           ‫ـش ـ َ‬
       ‫اض ِم ْن َك َد ِر‬
                      ‫ٱلِيَ ِ‬     ‫بِٱ لَّ ِذ ي ِف ْ‬


‫‪194‬‬
Chimera—recall her
  and she’s gone—
too quick for thought
  or observation


Words would describe her
  but she rises
always just beyond
  and leaves them a’stammer


They’d place her
  but she steals away
leaving them baffled
  by her traces


Riders pursuing
  might ease their pace
but no one can ease
  a racing mind


All who love her                         [10]
  she revives,
then takes beyond
  the bounds of mortal being


Unwilling to lavish
  her nectared kiss
on a would-­be lover
  in the mire


                               Chimera   195
                                                                 ‫‪45‬‬




                                                                    ‫أْ‬
                           ‫َح ــبَ ــابـَــنَ ــا أَيْـ ـ َـن ُه ـ ُـم‬
                                    ‫بِـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاهلل قُــولُـوا أَيْ ـ َـن ُهـ ْـم‬

                               ‫ت طَيـَْف ُه ْم‬      ‫َك َما َرأَيْ ُ‬
      ‫ف ـَ َـهـ ْـل تُـ ِريـ ِـي َع ـيْـن ـَ ُـهـ ْـم‬

                             ‫فَـ َكـ ْـم َوَكـ ْـم أَطْـلُـب ـُ ُـهـ ْـم‬
                           ‫َوَكـ ْـم َسـأَلْـ ُ‬
      ‫ـت ب ـَيْـن ـَ ُـهـ ْـم‬

                               ‫ـت بِـيْـن ـَ ُـهـ ْـم‬    ‫ِ‬
                                                   ‫َحـ َّـى أَمـْنـ ُ‬
      ‫ـت بـَـيـْـن ـَ ُـه ـ ْـم‬        ‫ِ‬
                             ‫َوَم ــا أَم ـْن ـ ُ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                            ‫لَـ َـعـ َّـل َسـ ْـعـ ِـد ي َحا يِ ٌل‬
                                           ‫ب ـَ ْ َ‬
      ‫ـن ٱلـن ـََّـوى َوب ـَي ـْن ـَ ُـهـ ْـم‬

                            ‫ـن بِِـ ْـم‬                                ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫ل ـتـَـنْـ َـع ـ َـم ٱلْ ـ َـع ـ ْ ُ‬
                           ‫فَ ـ َـا أَقُـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـول أَيْـ ـ َـن ُه ـ ْـم‬




‫‪196‬‬
Where Gone




Where are my true loves now? By God
tell me where they’ve gone


I have seen their apparition
Show me their true form!


How long have I sought among them
asking where they are


To be assured in their presence
but in the end—never sure


Perhaps my star will intervene                     [5]
twixt the here and far


My eyes rejoice, and my tongue
ask where O where no more




                                      Where Gone   197
                                                                                                             ‫‪46‬‬




                                         ‫ِ‬
              ‫ى‬       ‫ُّج ِل َح ْر ُ‬
              ‫ب َه َو ً‬                                   ‫ي ْ‬
                                  ‫ٱلَ َشا َوٱ لْعُيُون ٱلن ْ‬ ‫بـَْ َ‬
      ‫ب ِف حر ِ‬‫ٱلر ِ‬                    ‫وٱلْ َق ْل ِ‬
      ‫ب‬ ‫ََ‬        ‫َج ِل َذ َاك َْْ‬
                                 ‫ب م ْن أ ْ‬‫ُ‬

                                               ‫ـسـ ـ ٌ‬
                 ‫ـول ُمـ ـ َقـ ـب ـَّـلُ ـ َـه ــا‬                        ‫لَـ ـ ْـمـ ــيَـ ــاءُ لَـ ـ ْـعـ ـ َ‬
                                                    ‫ـسـ ــاءُ َمـ ـ ْـعـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـضــر ِ‬         ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
      ‫ب‬ ‫ـحـ ِـل َمــا ت ـُْلــقــي مـ َـن ٱلـ َّ َ‬    ‫ـادةُ ٱلـنَّـ ْ‬‫َشـ َـهـ َ‬


                     ‫ـور َعـ ـلَ ــى قَ ـ َـمـ ـ ٍر‬
                                                ‫ـخ ـ ِـل َد ْيُـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٌ‬        ‫َريَّ ـ ــا ٱلْ ـ ُـم ـ َ‬
                                                                        ‫ـخـ ـ ْل ـ َ‬
      ‫ـص ـ ٌـن َع ـلَــى ُك ــثُـ ِ‬
      ‫ـب‬                            ‫ِف َخ ـ ِّـد َه ــا َش ـ َف ـ ٌـق غُ ـ ْ‬

                     ‫ـت بِـ ــغَـ ــانِـ ــيَـ ـ ٍـة‬                              ‫ِ‬
                                                       ‫َح ـ ـ ْـس ـ ــنَـ ــاءُ َح ـ ــال ـ ــيَ ـ ـةٌ لَـ ـ ْـيـ ـ َ‬
                                                  ‫ـسـ ـ ْ‬
      ‫تـَـ ـ ْف ـ ـت ـَـ ُّـر َع ـ ـ ْـن ب ـَـ ـ ــرٍد ظـُ ـ ْلـ ـ ٍم و َع ـ ـ ْـن َش ــنَـ ِ‬
      ‫ـب‬                        ‫َ‬                    ‫َ‬

‫]‪[5‬‬                    ‫ـصـ ـ ُّـد ِجـ ـ ــدًّا َوت ـَـ ـ ْل ـ ـ ُـه ـ ــو بِ ـ ــٱ ْلَـ ـ َـوى لَــعِ ــبً ــا‬
                                                                                                            ‫تَـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ٱلِـ ِّـد وٱ ل ـلَّــعِـ ِ‬
      ‫ـب‬             ‫اك ْ َ‬            ‫ـن َذ َ‬    ‫ت َمــا بـَـ ْ َ‬      ‫َوٱ لْ ـ َـم ـ ْـو ُ‬


                   ‫ـس ٱ ل ـلَّـ ْـي ـ ُـل إِ َّل َج ـ ــاءَ يَـ ْـع ـ ُق ــبُــهُ‬
                                                                                ‫َم ــا َع ـ ْـس ـ َـع ـ َ‬
                ‫ـوم ِم ـ َـن ْ‬
      ‫ٱلُ ـ َق ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـب‬                         ‫ـص ـ ْـب ـ ِـح َم ـ ْـع ـلُـ ٌ‬       ‫ت ـَـنـَـ ُّـف ـ ُ‬
                                                             ‫ـس ٱل ـ ُّ‬


                       ‫ص ــبً ــا‬  ‫ض ِريَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
                                ‫ـاح َ‬                ‫َوَل َتُـ ـ ـ ـ ُّـر َع ـ ـلَـ ــى َر ْو ٍ‬
      ‫ـات ُخـ ـ ـ َّـرٍد عُ ـ ــر ِ‬
                                  ‫ـاعـ ــبـ ـ ٍ‬
                                            ‫ِ‬
      ‫ب‬ ‫ُ‬                              ‫َْي ـ ـ ـ ِوي َعـ ـلَ ــى َكـ ـ َ‬

‫‪198‬‬
Cool Lightning



There’s a wrench in my gut
   and a tear in my eye—
      my heart rages between

Deep red are her lips,
   her kisses sweet as
      clear honey from bees

Her anklets entice like a cloud
   on a moon—sunset
      on her cheek, branch on a dune

Single and yet her
   bangles sparkle, cool
      lightning is her smile

She guards herself in earnest                           [5]
   and in love she plays
      Death waits between

No night draws dark without
   the breath of dawn rising
      This we know of old

No wind from the East falls
   on a garden guarding maidens
      with budding breasts


                                       Cool Lightning   199
                            ‫ـس ـ ِـم ـ َـه ــا‬
                                             ‫ـت ِف تـَــنَ ـ ُّ‬‫ـت َوَنَّـ ـ ـ ـ ْ‬‫إِ َّل أ ََم ـ ــا لَـ ـ ْ‬
                                                             ‫ِ‬
           ‫ِبَـ ــا َحَـ ـ ْلـ ـ َـن م ـ ـ َـن ْٱل َْزَهـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا ِر َوٱلْـ ـ ُق ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـض ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـب‬


                                ‫ـصــبــا َع ـن ـْـهــم لِــتُـ ْ ِ‬
                       ‫ـرِن‬    ‫ـخـ َ‬        ‫ـت ِري ـ َـح ٱلـ َّ َ ُ ْ‬        ‫َس ـأَلْـ ُ‬
       ‫ٱل ْخ ــب ــا ِر ِمــن أَر ِ‬
       ‫ب‬ ‫ْ َ‬              ‫ـك ِف ِْ َ‬           ‫ـت َوَم ــا لَـ َ‬ ‫قَــا لَـ ْ‬

                                     ‫ـن وِف بـ ــر ِك ٱ لْــغِــمـ ِ‬  ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[10‬‬                       ‫ـاد َوِف‬     ‫َ‬               ‫ِف ْٱلَبـْـ َـرقـَـ ْ َ َ ْ‬
       ‫ٱلَ ـ َّـي َع ـ ْـن َكــثَـ ِ‬                      ‫ِ ِ‬
       ‫ـب‬                         ‫ـت ْ‬‫ب ـَـ ْـرك ٱلْــغَــمـيـ ِم تَـ َـرْك ـ ُ‬


                        ‫ـت َل ـَـا‬                                       ‫ِ ِِ‬
                                                     ‫َل تَـ ْـس ــتَــق ـ ُّـل بـ ـ ْـم أ َْر ٌ‬
                                  ‫ض ف ـَـ ُقـ ـ ْل ـ ُ‬
       ‫ـشــو ِق ِف ٱلـطَّـلَـ ِ‬
       ‫ـب‬                     ‫أَيْـ َـن ٱلْـ َـمـ َفـ ُّـر َو َخـ ْـيـ ُـل ٱلـ َّ ْ‬


                           ‫ىن ِس َوى َخلَ ِدي‬         ‫س َلُ ْم َم ْغ ً‬         ‫َهيـَْه َ‬
                                                                        ‫ات لَْي َ‬
          ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـت يَـ ُك ــو ُن ٱلْ ــبَ ـ ْدر فَـ ْـارتَــقـ ِ‬
       ‫ـب‬               ‫ُ‬                                      ‫ـحـ ْـيـ ُ‬
                                                     ‫ـث ُك ـْنـ ُ‬      ‫فَـ َ‬


                          ‫ـس َم ـطْ ـلَــعُ ـ َـه ــا َو ِْه ـ ـ ــي َوَمـ ـ ْغـ ـ ِربـُـ َـه ــا‬
                                                                                               ‫أَلَـ ـ ْـيـ ـ َ‬
                        ‫ِ‬
       ‫ـان وٱ لْ ــغَ ــر ِ‬
       ‫ب‬ ‫قـَـ ْل ـ ِـي فـَـ َق ـ ْد َز َال ُش ـ ْـؤ ُم ٱ لْــبَـ َ َ‬


                            ‫اب نَـ ــعِ ـ ـيـ ـ ٌـق ِف َمـ ــنَـ ــا ِزلِـ ــنَـ ــا‬
                                                                                  ‫م ـ ــا لِ ـ ـل ـ ــغُـ ــر ِ‬
                                                                                     ‫َ‬                        ‫َ‬
       ‫ـش ــم ـ ِـل ِمـ ــن نَـ ـ َـد بِ‬                 ‫ِ‬   ‫ِ‬          ‫ِ‬
                    ‫ْ‬              ‫َوَمـ ــا لَـ ــهُ ف نـ ـظَ ــام ٱ ل ـ َّ ْ‬




‫‪200‬‬
Without stirring the leaves
   and wafting the perfume
      it gathers and passes on


I asked the Eastwind about them
   And who are you to want
      to know? she answered


I left them at Twin Flash—                               [10]
   and at the relays of Ghimād
      and Ghamīm, close by


It’s said no land can hold them
   But they will never elude
      the cavalries of my longing


They hide in my soul
   and here where I am, look!
      the full moon rises


In my mind, then sets
   in my heart   Gone’s
      the curse of willow and moringa

And here where we dwell
   no crow can caw, ruing
      our embrace as one




                                        Cool Lightning   201
                                                                                                        ‫‪47‬‬




                                                ‫ِ‬            ‫َح ـ ــامـ ـ ـةَ ٱلْ ـ ــب ـ ـ ِ‬
                        ‫ـان بِ ـ ـ ـ َذات ٱلْ ــغَ ـ َ‬
                    ‫ـض ــا‬                                         ‫َ‬                ‫َ َ‬
      ‫ـضــا‬‫ـ‬ ‫ف‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                 ‫ْ‬ ‫ٱ‬    ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ـه‬‫ـ‬ ‫ي‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                ‫ـن‬‫ـ‬ ‫ِ‬
                                    ‫ـت‬‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬
                                        ‫ْ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ح‬
                                            ‫َّ‬    ‫ـا‬‫ـ‬
                                               ‫َ َ َ َ‬‫ـم‬‫ـ‬‫ِ‬‫ل‬ ‫ـاق‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ض‬
         ‫َ َ‬



                 ‫َم ْن َذ ا ٱ لَّ ِذ ي َْي ِم ُل َش ْج َو ٱ ْلََوى‬
                                  ‫ِ‬
       ‫َم ْن َذ ا ٱ لَّذ ي َْيَرعُ ُمَّر ٱ لْ َق َ‬
      ‫ضا‬



                    ‫ـول ِم ـ ـ ْـن َو ْجـ ـ ـ ٍـد َوِمـ ـ ـ ْـن لَـ ـ ْـو َعـ ـ ٍـة‬
                                                                                ‫أَقُـ ـ ـ ُ‬
         ‫ض ـ ِـي َمـ َّـر َ‬
      ‫ضــا‬                    ‫ـت َم ـ ْـن أ َْم ـ َـر َ‬  ‫يَــا لَـ ْـيـ َ‬



                                                                   ‫م ـ ـ َّـر بِـ ــب ـ ـ ِ‬
                  ‫ـاب ٱل ـ ـ ــدَّا ِر ُم ـ ْـسـ ـتـَـ ْـهـ ـ ِزئـ ـاً‬   ‫َ َ‬
      ‫ضــا‬‫ِ‬
          ‫ر‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـع‬‫ـ‬ ‫م‬      ‫ا‬
                         ‫ـر‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫مــســتــخـ ِـفــيــا م ــع ــت ـ ِ‬
                               ‫ـج‬
         ‫ُ َْ ْ ً ُ َْ ً ُ ْ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                 ‫ض ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َّـرِن تـَـ ـ ـ ـ ْـع ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـج ـ ـ ـ ــرُهُ إَِّنَـ ـ ـ ـ ــا‬
                                                                                                   ‫َم ـ ـ ـ ــا َ‬
      ‫ض ــا‬                ‫ِ‬      ‫ِ‬                 ‫ِ‬
                  ‫َض ـ ـ َّـر ِب مـ ـ ْـن َك ـ ْـون ــه أ ْ‬
          ‫َع ـ َـر َ‬                                                          ‫أَ‬




‫‪202‬‬
The Turning




Moringa dove cooing
in Dhāt al-­Gháda—
no world can hold
your song


Who can bear
love’s sorrows
or down fate’s
bitter potion?


Heartsplit I cry,
O you who put me
through all this
will you care for me now?


He passed by
my door laughing,
hid his face
then turned away


It wasn’t his hiding                      [5]
that hurt, no
It was the turning,
the turning away




                            The Turning   203
                                                                                       ‫‪48‬‬




                                       ‫يس بِ َس ْل ٍع َعِّر ِج‬ ‫ي ٱ لْعِ ِ‬   ‫ِ‬
                                                                          ‫يَا َحاد َ‬
      ‫ـف َع ـلَــى ٱلْ ــبَ ــانَـ ِـة بِ ــٱلْ ـ ُـم ـ َـد َّرِج‬     ‫ِ‬
                                                                ‫َوق ـ ـ ْ‬
                              ‫اد ِه ْم ُم ْستـَْع ِط ًفا ُم ْستـَْل ِط ًفا‬  ‫ونَ ِ‬
                                                                                   ‫َ‬
      ‫اد ِات َه ْل ِعْن َد ُك ْم ِم ْن ف ـََـر ِج‬     ‫َ ََ‬   ‫س‬       ‫ا‬‫ي‬
                                    ‫بِـ ــرامـ ـ ٍـة ب ـ ـ ــن ٱل ـنـَّـ َق ــا وح ـ ِ‬
                              ‫ـاجـ ـ ٍر‬    ‫ََ‬                        ‫َ َ َ َْ‬
                         ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـورةٌ ف َهـ ـ ـ ْـو َد ِج‬                             ‫ِ‬
                                     ‫َج ـ ــا ريَ ـ ـةٌ َم ـ ـ ْقـ ـ ُ‬
                               ‫ـصـ ـ َ‬
                                 ‫يـَـا ُح ْسنـََها ِمـ ْـن طَْفلَ ٍة غُـَّـرت ـُ َـهــا‬
              ‫ـض ــيءُ لِ ـل ـطَّــا ِرِق ِم ـثْـ ِـل ٱل ـ ُّ‬
      ‫ـس ـ ُـرِج‬                                                  ‫تُـ ِ‬

                             ‫ف‬   ‫لُـ ــؤلُـ ــؤةٌ مـ ـ ْك ــنُــونـَ ـةٌ ِف صـ ـ َـد ٍ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                                       ‫َ‬                         ‫ْ َ َ‬
      ‫ـســبَـ ِـج‬     ‫ِ‬                     ‫ِ‬ ‫ٍ‬                 ‫ِ‬
               ‫م ـ ْـن َش ـ َـع ـر م ـثْـ َـل َس ـ ـ َـواد ٱلـ َّ‬
                        ‫اص ـ َـه ــا ٱلْـ ِـف ـ ْك ـ ُـر فَـ َـمــا‬
                                                                 ‫لُ ـ ْـؤلُ ـ َـؤةٌ َغ ـ َّـو ُ‬
                  ‫اق تِْل َ‬
      ‫ك ٱللُّ َج ِج‬           ‫َعم ِ‬
                                   ‫ـك ف أ ْ َ‬
                                                    ‫ي ـَن ـْ َفـ ُّ ِ‬

                       ‫ـي نـَـ ًق ــا‬                    ‫ِ‬
                                   ‫ـس ـب ـُ َـه ــا نَــاظ ـ ُـرَه ــا ظَـ ـ ْ َ‬
                                                                              ‫َْي ـ َ‬
                  ‫يد َها َو ُح ْس ِن َذ َ‬
      ‫اك ٱ لْغَنَ ِج‬                         ‫ِمن ِج ِ‬
                                                           ‫ْ‬
                          ‫حى ِف َحَـ ٍـل‬  ‫ض ً‬     ‫ـس ُ‬      ‫َكـأَن ـَّ َـهــا َشْـ ُ‬
                                                          ‫ِ‬
        ‫ـص ــى َم ـ َـع ـ ِـال ٱل ـ ــد َ‬
      ‫َّرِج‬                            ‫قَــاط ـ َـع ـةً أَقْ ـ َ‬
                           ‫ت‬ ‫ت بـُْرقـَُع َها أ َْو َس َفَر ْ‬  ‫إِ ْن َح َسَر ْ‬
      ‫ـاح ْٱلَبـْـلَـ ِـج‬    ‫ت بِ ـأَنْـ َـوا ِر ٱ لـ َّ‬
                      ‫ـصــبَـ ِ‬                        ‫أ َْزَر ْ‬


‫‪204‬‬
Brave




Turn at Splitrock, driver, then halt
by the moringa in Mudárraj


Call out: Ladies, would you
grant us sweet release?


Near Râma, Hājir, and White Dune
a shy-­eyed girl rides in a palanquin


She lights the way like a lamp
for a man walking the night




Pearl in a shell of jet black hair—             [5]
The mind dives after, sinking deep




Neck supple, gestures coquette,
like a gazelle of the shifting sands


Like the forenoon sun arcing
over Aries


When she lowers her veil, she covers
dawn in her morning light



                                        Brave   205
‫]‪[10‬‬                               ‫ٱلِـ َـمــى َوَر َام ـ ٍـة‬
                                                           ‫ـن ْ‬                       ‫نَـ َ‬
                                                                ‫ـاديْـت ـُ َـهــا بَـ ْ َ‬
       ‫ـس ـ ْل ـ ٍع يـَـ ْـرَِت ــي‬ ‫ِ‬                        ‫ِ‬
                                 ‫َمـ ـ ْـن لـ ـ َف ـ ًـى َحـ ـ َّـل ب ـ َ‬
                                     ‫َم ـ ْـن لِ ـ َف ـ ًـى ُم ـتـَـيَّ ـ ٍم ِف َمـ ْـهـ َـمـ ٍـه‬
       ‫ُم ـ ـ َـولَّـ ـ ٍـه ُم ـ ـ َـدلَّـ ـ ِـه ٱلْـ ـ َـع ـ ـ ْقـ ـ ِـل َش ـ ِـج ــي‬

                                       ‫َم ـ ـ ْـن لِـ ـ َف ـ ًـى َع ـ ـب ـْ ـ َـرتـُ ــهُ ُمـ ـ ْغـ ـ ِرقَـ ـةٌ‬
       ‫َسـ ـ ـ َك ـ ـ َـرهُ َخْ ـ ـ ـ ٌـر بِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َذ َاك ٱلْـ ـ َفـ ـلَ ـ ِـج‬    ‫أْ‬
                                   ‫َم ـ ـ ْـن لِـ ـ َفـ ـ ًـى َزف ـْ ـ ـ َـرتـُ ـ ــهُ ُْم ـ ـ ِرقَ ـ ـةٌ‬
                               ‫ـال َذ َ‬
       ‫اك ٱ لْ ـ ـبـَـ ـلَـ ـ ِـج‬         ‫تـَـ ـيَّـ ـ َـم ـ ــهُ َجَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬

                            ‫ت أَيْ ِد ي ٱ ْلََوى بَِق ْلبِ ِه‬             ‫ِ‬
                                                                      ‫قَ ْد لَعبَ ْ‬
       ‫فَـ َـمــا َع ـلَـ ْـيـ ِـه ِف ٱلَّ ـ ِـذي ِم ـ ْـن َح ـ َـرِج‬




‫‪206‬‬
I cried out between Híma and Râma,                 [10]
Who’s here for a lad who halts and hopes


At Salʿ   For one in a desert maze,
haggard, haunted, forlorn?


For one drowned in his tears,
drunk on the wine of her open mouth?


For one burned in sighs,
lost in the glow between her eyes?


Desire’s hand played on his heart
Where is his crime?




                                           Brave   207
                                                                                     ‫‪49‬‬



                         ‫ـضــوبـ ِـة ٱ لْ ـب ــنَـ ِ‬                 ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ـان‬       ‫ـخـ ُ َ َ‬                    ‫َم ـ ْـن ِل بـَ ْ‬
      ‫م ــن ِل ِبَــعــســولَـ ِـة ٱ ل ـلِّــسـ ِ‬
      ‫ـان‬ ‫َ‬                      ‫ْ ُ‬                     ‫َْ‬
                        ‫ات ِخـ ْد ٍر‬     ‫ـات َذ و ِ‬       ‫ـاعــبـ ٍ‬  ‫ِ‬         ‫ِ‬
                                                  ‫َ‬                 ‫مـ ْـن َكـ َ‬
      ‫اعـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍم نـ ـ ـ َّـه ـ ـ ٍـد ِح ـ ــس ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـان‬                                            ‫نـ ـ ـ ـ ــو ِ‬
            ‫َ‬                        ‫ُ‬                  ‫َ َ‬
                   ‫ب ـ ـ ـ ُـد ور َتٍّ عـ ـلَ ــى غُ ــص ـ ٍ‬
                   ‫ـون‬  ‫ُ‬                     ‫ُ ُ َ‬
      ‫ـص ِف أَم ــانِ‬
                   ‫ِ‬                    ‫ِ‬
                     ‫ُهـ َّـن مـ َـن ٱل ـن ـَّ ْقـ‬
            ‫َ‬
                    ‫ض ٍة ِم ْن ِديَا ِر ِج ْس ِمي‬‫ِف َرْو َ‬
      ‫َح ــامـ ـةٌ فـ ـ ــو َق غُ ــص ـ ِن ب ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـان‬ ‫ْ َ‬              ‫َ َ َْ‬
                 ‫ـوت َش ْوقًا‬               ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                                           ‫تَـ ُذ ُ‬
                             ‫وب ع ْش ًقا َتـُ ُ‬
      ‫اها ٱ لَّ ِذ ي َش َج ِان‬
                            ‫لَ َّما َش َج َ‬
                           ‫ب إِلْ ـ ـ ًفـ ــا تَـ ـ ـ ُذ ُّم َد ْه ـ ـ ًـرا‬
                                                                          ‫ت ـَـ ـْن ـ ـ ُـد ُ‬
      ‫ـص ـ ًـدا ِبـَ ــا َرَم ـ ـ ِـان‬   ‫ـاهـ ــا قَ ـ ْ‬‫َرَمـ ـ َ‬
                        ‫ي َد ا ٍر‬                   ‫ٍ‬          ‫فِ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـر ُ‬
                                ‫اق َج ـ ـ ــا ر َونَـ ـ ـ ـ ـأْ ُ‬
      ‫ف ـَـ ـ ـ َـوا َزَم ـ ـ ـ ِـان َعـ ـلَ ــى َزَم ـ ـ ِـان‬

                        ‫ـضــي َعـ َذ ِاب‬ ‫مــن ِل ِبـَـن ت ــرتَـ ِ‬
                                              ‫ْ َْ‬            ‫َْ‬
                       ‫م ــا ِل ِبَــا تـ ــرتَـ ِ‬
      ‫ـض ــي يـ ـ َـد انِ‬
                ‫َ‬            ‫َْ‬                     ‫َ‬




‫‪208‬‬
In the Ruins of My Body




Who’ll show me her henna’d hand?
Who her honey’d tongue?


Such an enticing girl she is,
and in her beauty guarded well


Full moons on a flowering bough—
those like her will never fade


In the ruins of my body there’s
a garden dove high in a moringa


She dies longing, dissolved in desire,                             [5]
stricken with what struck me


Her mate she mourns and blames time’s
arrow buried in both our hearts


The near are gone, home’s far away
Time has taken all that was


Who’s with me as she commends my pain
Before her, all my power fades




                                         In the Ruins of My Body   209
                                                                                                                      ‫‪50‬‬




                    ‫ت بِ ـ ــغَ ـ ـ َـدائـِ ـ ـ ٍر‬                                               ‫ِ‬
                                                      ‫َو َغ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــاد َرٍة قَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْد َغ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
                                                 ‫ـاد َر ْ‬
      ‫ـاع ـ ــي َمـ ـ ْـن أ ََر َاد َس ـبِ ـيـ َـا‬     ‫َش ـبِ ـي ــه ْٱلَفَـ ـ ِ‬
                                                                               ‫َ‬
                                                                         ‫ِ‬                                           ‫ِ‬
                     ‫َسـ ــل ـ ـيـ ـ ًـمـ ــا َوتَـ ـ ـ ـل ـ ـ ـ ـ ِوي ل ـ ـي ـ ـن ـَ ـ َـهـ ــا فَـ ــتُـ ــذيِـ ــبُـ ــهُ‬
      ‫اش َع ــلِ ـي ـ َـا‬    ‫َوت ـَ ـ ـتـْـ ــرُك ـ ــهُ ف ـَـ ـ ـ ـ ْـو َق ٱلْ ـ ـ ـ ِـف ـ ـ ـ َـر ِ‬
                                                                                   ‫ُ‬
                      ‫ب‬‫اج ٍ‬     ‫رمت بِ ِسه ِام ٱللَّح ِظ عن ق ــو ِس ح ِ‬
                                    ‫ْ َ ْ َْ َ‬                                                       ‫ََ ْ َ‬
           ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـت قَـتـيـ َـا‬                                   ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬                     ‫ِ‬
                         ‫ـت ُك ـْن ـ َ‬      ‫َي ش ـ ٍّـق ج ـ ْـئ ـ َ‬         ‫فَــم ـ ْـن أ ِّ‬




‫‪210‬‬
Done




Double-­dealer with curls like snakes
she left a man who sought the way


Coiled him in her ringlets
and left him stricken on the bed


Prey to her glances from every side
Whichever way you’ve come, you’re done




                                         Done   211
                                                                                            ‫‪51‬‬




                          ‫ـن َوبَ ــا ِرِق‬     ‫َض ــا وٱلْ ــم ـأْ ِزَم ـ ْ ِ‬ ‫ِ ِ‬
                                                              ‫بـ ـ َذات ْٱل َ َ َ‬
      ‫ـن لِـ ـطَ ــا ِر ِق‬
                        ‫و ِذ ي َسـ ـلَـ ـ ٍم و ْٱل ب ـْ ـ ــرق ـَ ـ ـ ْ ِ‬
                                    ‫َ َ‬                                     ‫َ‬



                           ‫وق مــبـ ِ‬
                       ‫ـاسـ ٍم‬        ‫ِ‬          ‫ٍ ِ‬           ‫بـُـ ُـر ُ‬
                               ‫وق ُســيُــوف مـ ْـن بـُـ ُـر َ َ‬
           ‫ِ‬      ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـت لــنَــاشـ ِـق‬      ‫ِ‬          ‫ٍ‬      ‫ِ‬     ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ـج مـ ْـســك َمــا أُبـيـ َ‬
                     ‫ـحـ ْ‬                       ‫نَـ َـواف ـ ُ‬



                             ‫وف ِل ِ‬
                       ‫اظ ِه ْم‬                               ‫ِ‬
                               ‫فَإ ْن ُحو ِربُوا َسلُّوا ُسيُ َ َ‬
      ‫ضائِ ِق‬                                ‫ِ‬
                      ‫َوإِ ْن ُسول ُموا َه ُّد وا عُ ُق َ‬
            ‫ود ٱ لْ َم َ‬



                                      ‫َّ ِ‬                               ‫ِ‬
                     ‫ـاوتَ ــا‬ ‫ف ـَ ــنَـ ــالُـ ـوا َونـ ـ ْل ــنَ ــا لَـ ـ ــذت ـَـ ـ ْـن تَ ـ َ‬
                           ‫ـس ـ َ‬
           ‫ـك لِــعـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاشـ ِـق‬                   ‫ـك لِــمــعـ ُ ٍ‬
               ‫ـشــوق َوُم ـ ْل ـ ٌ َ‬     ‫فَـ ُـم ـ ْلـ ٌ َ ْ‬




‫‪212‬‬
Nightwalker




For a nightwalker
at Ma’zimáyn or Áda,
at Flashrock, Ridge
or Abraqáyn


There are swords
flashing through smiles
and pouches of musk
forbidden the senses


Resist and they’ll
unsheathe their glances
Give in and they
will shatter the chains


We took and they
took equal pleasure—
Kingdoms for the beloved
and for the lover




                           Nightwalker   213
                                                                                                            ‫‪52‬‬




                         ‫ـاخــا‬                                            ‫ـت بِـ َـر ْ‬     ‫ِ‬
                              ‫ضـ ـ ـةً َوُمــنَـ َ‬   ‫ض ـ َـوى َرْو َ‬                 ‫َرض ـي ـ ُ‬
                        ‫ِ ِ‬                                 ‫ِ‬
          ‫فَ ـ ـ ـِإ َّن بِـ ـ ــه َم ـ ـ ْـر ًع ـ ــى َوفـ ـ ـي ـ ــه ن ـُ ـ َق ـ َ‬
      ‫ـاخ ــا‬



                            ‫صبِ ِه‬       ‫عسى أَهل و ِّد ي يسم ِِ‬
                                  ‫عو َن ب ْ‬           ‫َ َ ْ ُ ُ ََْ ُ‬
      ‫ـاخ ـ ــا‬                                            ‫ِ‬
               ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـن‬‫ـ‬
            ‫فـَـ ــيَـ ـ ـتَّ ـ ــخـ ـ ـ ُذوهُ َ ْ َ ً َ ُ َ َ‬
                       ‫ـ‬ ‫م‬‫و‬   ‫ـا‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ـع‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬
                                              ‫ـر‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬‫م‬



                   ‫فَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـِإ َّن لَـ ــنَ ـ ــا ق ـَـ ـ ْل ـ ــبً ـ ــا بِِ ـ ـ ـ َّـن ُم ـ َـعـ ـلَّـ ـ ًق ــا‬
      ‫اخا‬         ‫إِ َذ ا ما ح َد ى ْ ِ ِِ‬
          ‫ٱلَاد ي ب َّن أ َ‬
       ‫َص َ‬                                                ‫َ َ‬



                    ‫ـاد ْوا لِـلـ َّـر ِحـيـ ِـل َوفـَـ ـ َّـوُزوا‬
                                                               ‫َوإِ ْن ُه ـ ْـم تـَــنَ ـ َ‬
      ‫اخــا‬       ‫ِ‬                                                 ‫ِ‬
                ‫ـف ٱلـ ِّـرَكــاب ُ‬
         ‫صـ َـر َ‬                    ‫ـت لَــهُ َخـ ْلـ َ‬    ‫َسـ ْـعـ َ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                    ‫ـامـ ُـهـ ْـم‬                                       ‫فَـِإ ْن قَـ َ‬
                                 ‫ـصـ ُـدوا ٱل ـ َّـزْوَراءَ َكــا َن أ ََمـ َ‬
                                              ‫َوإِ ْن َيـَّـ ُـمـ ــوا ْ‬
          ‫ٱلَـ ـ ـ ْـر َعـ ـ ــاءَ َثَّ أَنَ ـ َ‬
      ‫ـاخ ــا‬




‫‪214‬‬
Rídwa




Happy the thought
   of Rídwa’s pastures
where the traveler finds
   cool waters and rest


My love’s party might
   have heard of the place,
kneeled camels there
   and encamped


Wherever they go
   my soul clings
as they chant
   their camels on


And when amid shouts
   they break toward desert
you can hear it
   howling on their trail


If they move toward Zawrā’              [5]
   that’s where it leads them
If it’s Jawrā’ they seek
   it awaits them there




                                Rídwa   215
                        ‫ث َكا نُوا َو َخيَّ ُموا‬      ‫فَ َما ٱلطَّيـُْر إِ َّل َحْي ُ‬
                      ‫ِ‬
            ‫فَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـِإ َّن لَـ ـ ـ ــهُ ِف َح ـ ـيِّ ـ ـ ِه ـ ـ َّـن ف ـ ـ َـر َ‬
      ‫اخ ـ ــا‬



                            ‫َجلِ َها‬
                                  ‫ف م ْن أ ْ‬
                                            ‫ف ِل وخو ٌ ِ‬
                                                         ‫ب َخ ْو ٌ َ َ ْ‬           ‫َتَ َار َ‬
      ‫اخـ ــا‬                  ‫ِ‬  ‫ِ‬       ‫ِ‬                       ‫ِ‬
           ‫َوَمـ ـ ــا َواح ـ ـ ـ ـ ٌد َع ـ ـ ْـن قـ ـ ْـرنـ ــه يَـ ـت ـَ ـ َـر َ‬



              ‫ـحــا ت ـُ َـهــا‬
                             ‫ـارنَــا ُســبُـ َ‬
                                              ‫ـص ـ َ‬        ‫إِ َذ ا َخ ـطَـ َف ـ ْ‬
                                                  ‫ـت أَبْ ـ َ‬
            ‫ِ‬
       ‫ٱلش ِه ِيق ص َم َ‬
      ‫اخا‬                 ‫ت َّ‬               ‫َصـ َّـم َلـَـا َ‬
                                      ‫صـ ْـو ُ‬              ‫أَ‬




‫‪216‬‬
Wherever they are
   wherever they camp
the bird follows
   For its chicks are there


Two fears ceaselessly
   vie within me,
fear for myself
   and fear for her


Lest her splendor
   shatter my gaze
and she be deafened
   by my sighs




                              Rídwa   217
                                                                                                        ‫‪53‬‬




                            ‫إِ َذ ا َمــا ٱ لْ ـتَـ َق ـي ـْـنَــا لِـ ـ ْل ـ َـو َد ِاع َحـ ِـسـ ْـبـت ـَـنَــا‬
      ‫َّم َوٱلتـَّْعنِ ِيق َح ْرفًا ُم َش َّد َد ا‬        ‫لَ َد ى ٱلض ِّ‬


                                ‫وصنَا‬
                                   ‫ت ُمثـًَّن ُش ُخ ُ‬       ‫فـَنَ ْح ُن َوإِ ْن َكا نَ ْ‬
      ‫ـار إَِّل ُم ـ َـو َّح ـ َـد ا‬                    ‫ِ‬
                                       ‫فَـ َـمــا ت ـُ ْـب ــص ـ ُـر ْٱلَبْ ـ َ‬
                                   ‫ـص ـ ُ‬

                                            ‫اك إِ َّل ِمـ ـ ْـن ُنُـ ـ ِ‬
                            ‫ـول َونُـ ــو ِرِه‬                          ‫َو َم ـ ــا َذ َ‬
      ‫ل َم ـ ْشـ َـهـ َـد ا‬                          ‫ِ‬
                           ‫ف ـَ ـلَ ـ ْـوَل أَن ـي ـ ِـي َم ــا َرأ ْ ِ‬
                          ‫َت َ‬




‫‪218‬‬
Like a Doubled Letter




Parting we cling to each
other and intertwine
like a doubled letter


Although our shapes
are two we appear
as one alone


He’s light and I am shadow
If I didn’t moan
you’d never see me




                             Like a Doubled Letter   219
                                                                                                                        ‫‪54‬‬




                          ‫ـوس بِـ ـ َـدا ِر ٱلْـ َف ـلَـ ْ‬
                         ‫ـك‬                            ‫َوقَــالُ ـوا ُشـُـ ٌ‬
      ‫س إِ َّل ٱ لْ َفلَ ْ‬
      ‫ك‬                     ‫َو َه ْل َمْن ِز ُل ٱلش ْ‬
                         ‫َّم ِ‬

                                 ‫ش َع ـلَــى َس ــاقِـ ِـه‬               ‫إِ َذ ا قَـ ـ َ‬
                                                            ‫ـام َع ـ ـ ْـر ٌ‬
      ‫ٱس ــتِ ـ َـواءُ ٱ لْـ َـمــلِـ ْ‬
      ‫ـك‬                              ‫فـَـلَـ ْـم ي ـَ ْـب ـ َـق إَِّل ْ‬
                           ‫ب ِم ْن َج ْهلِ ِه‬           ‫ص ٱ لْ َق ْل ُ‬
                                                                                      ‫ِ‬
                                                                          ‫إ َذ ا َخلَ َ‬
      ‫ـك‬                 ‫فَ ـ َـم ــا ُه ـ ـ َـو إِ َّل نـ ـُ ـ ـ ـ ُـز ُ‬
      ‫ول ٱ لْ ـ َـم ـلَ ـ ْ‬

                               ‫َتَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـلَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َكـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـي وَتَـ ـ ـ ـ ـلَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْكـ ـ ـ ـ ــتُـ ـ ـ ـ ــهُ‬
      ‫ـاح ـ ـبِـ ـ ِـه قَـ ـ ـ ـ ْد َمـ ـلَ ـ ْ‬
      ‫ـك‬                                       ‫فَـ ـ ـ ُك ـ ــلٌّ لِـ ــصـ ـ ِ‬
                                                          ‫َ‬
                                                                        ‫ِ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                       ‫فَ ـ ـ ـ َك ـ ـ ـ ْـوِنَ م ـ ـ ْل ـ ـ ًكـ ــا لَـ ـ ــهُ بـَـ ـ ـ ـ ِّ ٌ‬
                          ‫ـن‬
      ‫ـك‬
      ‫ـت لَـ ْ‬                                             ‫ِ ِ‬
            ‫َوم ـ ْل ــك ــي لَ ــهُ ق ـَـ ْـولُـ ــهُ َه ـ ْـي ـ َ‬
                            ‫ـس َع ـ ِّـر ْج بِنَا‬  ‫ي ٱ لْــعِـيـ ِ‬     ‫ِ‬
                                                                     ‫ف ـَـيَــا َح ــاد َ‬
      ‫ـب َد َار ٱ لْـ َفـلَـ ْ‬
      ‫ـك‬                        ‫َول ت ـَ ْـع ـ ُـد بِــٱ لـ َّـرْكـ ِ‬

                                     ‫ـك د ار عـ ـلَ ــى َش ـ ِ‬
                               ‫ـاط ـ ٍـئ‬              ‫َعـ ـ ـلَّ ـ ـ َ َ ٌ َ‬
                                                                          ‫أَ‬
      ‫ـس ـ َّـى َوَم ـ ــا َع ـلَّ ـلَـ ْ‬
      ‫ـك‬                                             ‫ِ ِ‬
                                       ‫ب ـ ـ ُقـ ـ ْـرب ٱلْ ـ ُـم ـ َ‬
                                                                ‫ِ‬
                              ‫ـت ٱ لَّـ ـ ــذ ي ِب َو ُحِّـ ـ ْل ــتُ ــهُ‬
                                                                        ‫فـَـ ـلَـ ـ ْـيـ ـ َ‬
      ‫ب ٱ ْلـَـ َـوى َحَّـلَـ ْ‬
      ‫ـك‬                                     ‫ـب َر ُّ‬ ‫ٱلُ ـ ِّ‬      ‫ِ‬
                                                            ‫م ـ َـن ْ‬

                               ‫ـاج ـ ٌـر‬  ‫ف ـ ـلَـ ــيـ ــس زرود وَل ح ـ ِ‬
                                                     ‫َ ْ َ َُ ٌ َ َ‬
      ‫ـك‬‫ـ‬
      ‫ََ ْ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ْ‬
                       ‫َن‬ ‫أ‬ ‫ل‬
                            ‫ٌ‬ ‫ز‬‫ِ‬  ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫َوَل َسـ ـ ـلَ ـ ـ ٌـم َ ْ‬
                                          ‫ن‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫م‬


‫‪220‬‬
Dár al-­Fálak




Those suns, they tell us, are in Dār al-­Fálak
Beyond what heaven should a sun be set?


When the throne rests firm on its pillars,
the king has only to take his place


When the heart abandons its last delusion
it’s only an angel descending


I am his and he is mine
We belong to each other


I’m his, clearly, but is he mine?                                [5]
Come to me now, he’s saying


Red-­roan driver, hold on!
Don’t miss the turn at Dār al-­Fálak


May a riverbank camp near Musánna cast
a spell on you and never let go


The love I’ve borne, the pain endured—
may the lord of desire put you through it


It wasn’t Zarūd, Hājir, or Sálam
that left you, lover, drawn as a ghost




                                                 Dár al-­Fálak   221
‫]‪[10‬‬                          ‫ـت ِلَـ ـ ِّـر ٱ ْلـَ ـ ـ َـوى طَــالِــبًــا‬        ‫ِ‬
                                                                         ‫ظَ ــلـ ـ ْل ـ َ‬
       ‫ـال فَـ َـمــا ظَـلَّـلَـ ْ‬
       ‫ـك‬                         ‫ســحــاب ٱلْ ـ ِوص ـ ِ‬
                                        ‫َ‬          ‫َ َ َ‬
                    ‫ـسـ ـ ـ ْلـ ـ ـطَـ ــانِـ ـ ِـه‬   ‫أَ َذلَّـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِ ِ‬
                                                 ‫ـك عـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٌّـز ل ـ ـ ُ‬
                                                                         ‫َ‬
       ‫ـك‬    ‫َّ‬
       ‫ـك َذ ل لَـ ْ‬        ‫َّ‬
                  ‫ـت َك ـ َـم ــا َذ لـ ـلَ ـ َ‬       ‫ف ـَـلَ ـ ْـي ـ َ‬
                                                    ‫ويـ ـ ـ ـ ــا لَـ ــي ـ ــتَ ـ ــه إِ ْذ أ ِ‬
                                      ‫َب ع ـ ـ ـ ُّـزهُ‬          ‫َ‬                          ‫ْ ُ‬          ‫ََ‬
       ‫ـك‬                    ‫َّ‬                                                        ‫ُّ‬
       ‫تَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـدل ـ ـ ـ ـ ـلَـ ـ ـ ـ ــهُ لَـ ـ ـ ْـي ـ ـ ــتَ ـ ـ ــهُ َدل ـ ـ ـ ـ ـلَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ْ‬




‫‪222‬‬
In the scorching heat, you searched in vain                   [10]
for a cloud of union to shade you


May the one who subjected you
grant you affection


But if pride restrains him
let him embolden you




                                              Dár al-­Fálak   223
                                                                                                ‫‪55‬‬




                  ‫نـَْف ِسي فَأَلْتَ ِقي‬                 ‫يب فـَيـُْف ِن ٱلش َّْو ُق‬ ‫ِ‬
                                                                                 ‫أَغ ُ‬
      ‫ضَرا‬
         ‫فَٱلش َّْو ُق َغْيبًا َو َْم َ‬                  ‫فَ َل أَ ْشتَ ِفي‬



                                                                      ‫ِ‬
              ‫ث ِل لُـ ـ ْقـ ــيَـ ــاهُ َمـ ــا َلْ أَظُـ ـنَّـ ــهُ‬
                                                                    ‫َو ُْي ـ ـ ـ ـ ــد ُ‬
      ‫آخَرا‬ ‫ِ‬                  ‫ِ‬
         ‫ٱلش َفا َد اءً م َن ٱ لْ َو ْجد َ‬   ‫فَ َكا َن ِّ‬



                             ‫ـخـ ـصـ ـاً يَـ ـ ِزيـ ـ ُـد َجَـ ــا لُـ ــهُ‬                  ‫ِل ِّ‬
                                                                               ‫َن أ ََرى َش ـ ْ‬
      ‫ـض ـ َـرًة َوتَـ ـ َكـ ـبـُّـ َـرا‬    ‫إِ َذ ا َم ــا ٱ لْ ـتـَـ َق ـيْــنَ ــا نَ ـ ْ‬



                       ‫فَـ ـ َـا بـُ ـ َّـد ِمـ ـ ْـن َو ْجـ ـ ـ ٍـد يَـ ـ ُك ــو ُن ُم ـ َق ــا ِرنًــا‬
                                ‫ِ‬                          ‫ِ‬                   ‫ِ‬
                       ‫لـ َـمــا َز َاد م ـ ْـن ُحـ ْـس ـ ٍن ن ـظَـ ً‬
      ‫ـامــا ُمَ ـ َّـرَرا‬




‫‪224‬‬
No Cure




Without him I die
   and with him’s no better
With or without him
   longing’s the same


I found him, finding
   what I hadn’t foreseen,
the cure and disease
   as equal fevers


His silhouette flares
   as we draw near
each other and
   burns more proud


The deeper the harmony
   the sharper the pain
Measure for measure
   as decreed




                              No Cure   225
                                                                                        ‫‪56‬‬




                                              ‫ـشــرفَـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـاء ِمـ ْـن بـَـ ْغـ َـد ِاد‬                    ‫ٱلْـ َقـ ْ‬
                                                   ‫ـصـ ُـر ذُو ٱلـ ُّ ُ‬
      ‫ات ِمن ِسْن َدادِ‬
                     ‫َل ٱلْ َقصر ذُو ٱلشُّرفَ ِ‬
                 ‫ْ‬             ‫َ‬                ‫ُْ‬



                                           ‫ـاج ِم ـ ْـن ف ـَـ ْـو ِق ٱل ـ ِّـريَـ ِ‬
                             ‫ـاض َك ـأَنـَّـهُ‬                                  ‫َوٱل ـتَّـ ُ‬
      ‫ع ـ ـ ـ ْذراء قَـ ـ ْد ج ــلِــي ــت بِـ ـأَعـ ـطَـ ـ ِر نَــادِ‬
                         ‫ُ َ ْ ْ‬                          ‫َ َُ‬



                              ‫ون فـَتـَْنتَ ِشي‬   ‫ٱلريح تـ ْلعب بِٱ لْغُص ِ‬
                                                           ‫ُ‬                      ‫َو ِّ ُ َ َ ُ‬
      ‫وَك ـ ـ ـ ـ ـأَنـَّ ـ ـ ـ ــه ِم ـ ـنـ ـ ــه ـ ــا ع ـ ـلَ ـ ــى ِم ـ ـيـ ــعـ ــادِ‬
             ‫َ‬                        ‫ُ َْ َ‬                                             ‫َ‬



                        ‫َن ِد ْج ـلَـةَ ِسـ ْلـ ُكـ َـهــا ِف ِجـيـ ِـد َهــا‬
                                                                           ‫َوَك ـأ َّ‬
       ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـام ٱ ْل ـَ ــادي‬        ‫َوٱلْـ ـبـَـ ْـع ــل َس ـيِّـ ُـدنَــا ِْ‬
                    ‫ٱل َم ـ ـ ـ ُ‬                   ‫ُ‬



‫]‪[5‬‬                        ‫ـور َخ ـيْـ ُـر َخــلِـيـ َفـ ٍـة‬                      ‫ِ‬
                                                             ‫أَل ـنَّــاصـ ُـر ٱلْـ َـم ـْنـ ُ‬
                                                         ‫ـصـ ُ‬
      ‫ـن َج ـ َـو ِاد‬
                   ‫ب َم ـ ْ َ‬    ‫ٱل ـ ــر ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
                                       ‫َل َيـْـتَــطــي ِف َْ ْ‬




‫‪226‬‬
Baghdad Song




I long for Baghdād’s
   palace of the brave
(not for the battlements
   of old Sindād)


It crowns the gardens
   cascading below—
a virgin revealed
   in a perfumed chamber


The branches are stirred
   by the wind and bend,
lovers joined
   together at last


The river Tigris
   adorns her
Her lord’s our master
   imâm and guide—


Násir, Mansúr,                            [5]
   best of the caliphs,
who never rode out
   for war




                           Baghdad Song   227
                 ‫ـت بِـ ِـه‬                                   ‫ِ‬
                                    ‫صـلَّــى َعـلَـ ْـيــه ٱهللُ َمــا َ‬
                         ‫صـ َـد َحـ ْ‬                                  ‫َ‬
      ‫ورقَـ ـ ــا م ـ ـطَـ ـ َّـوقَـ ـةٌ عـ ـلَ ــى مـ ـيَّ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد‬       ‫َ َ‬                               ‫َْ ُ‬



                   ‫وق مــبـ ِ‬
               ‫ـاسـ ٍم‬                 ‫َوَكـ ـ َذ َاك َمــا ب ـَ َـرقَـ ْ‬
                       ‫ـت بـُـ ُـر ُ َ َ‬
      ‫ـحــت َلــا ِمــن مـ ْقـلَــي َغــوادِ‬
         ‫َسـ َّ ْ َ ْ ُ ََّ َ‬



                                                       ‫ٍ‬
                                           ‫ِمـ ْـن ُخـ َّـرد َك َ‬
                                      ‫ٱلش ْم ِ‬
              ‫س أَقْـلَـ َـع َغْيثـَُها‬
      ‫َض ــوا مــســتــنِـ ٍر ب ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد‬                             ‫فـ ــب ـ َـد ْ ِ‬
          ‫ت ب ـأ ْ َ ُ ْ َ َ‬                    ‫ََ‬




‫‪228‬‬
God bless him
   long as a dove
on a bough coos
   and sways


Long as smiles
   flash lightning
(my eyes responding
   like the morning rain)


From a bride like
   the sun when the mists
part, unveiling
   herself in splendor




                            Baghdad Song   229
                                                                                                          ‫‪57‬‬




                        ‫أ ََل يَـ ــا نَـ ِـس ـي ـ َـم ٱ لـ ـ ّـريِـ ـ ِـح بَـ ـلِّـ ـ ْغ َم ـ َـه ــا َْنـ ـ ٍـد‬
      ‫َن َع ـلَــى َم ــا تَـع ـلَـ ُـمــو َن ِم ـ َـن ٱلْـ َـعـ ْـهـ ِـد‬          ‫بِـ ـأ ِّ‬

                               ‫ٱلَـ ـ ـ ِّـي َمـ ـ ْـو ِعـ ـ ُـدنـَ ــا ْ‬
                    ‫ٱلِ ـ َـم ــى‬                                      ‫ـاة ْ‬ ‫وقُـ ـ ــل لِـ ـ َف ــت ـ ِ‬
                                                                                     ‫َ ْ َ‬
      ‫ـت ِع ـْن ــد ربـ ــا َن ــدِ‬
                                  ‫ِ‬     ‫ـس ـ ْـب ـ‬         ‫ِ‬
                                                ‫غُ ـ َـديـَّ ـةَ ي ـَـ ـ ْـوم ٱل ـ َّ‬
           ‫َ َُ ْ‬
                     ‫ٱلص َوى‬  ‫ب ُّ‬     ‫ٱلَ ْمر ِاء ِم ْن َجانِ ِ‬          ‫علَى َّ ِ‬
                                                                ‫ٱلربـَْوة ْ َ‬     ‫َ‬
      ‫وع ــن أ َْي ـ ـ ِن ْٱلَفْ ـ ـ َـا ِج وٱلْــع ـلَ ـ ِم ٱلْ ـ َف ــردِ‬
        ‫ْ‬                     ‫َ َ‬                            ‫َْ َ‬
                  ‫ـول َو ِعـ ـْن ـ َـد َه ــا‬
                                           ‫فَـ ـ ـ ـِإ ْن َكـ ـ ــا َن َح ـ َّـق ــا َمـ ــا تـَـ ـ ُقـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـشـ ْـو ِق ٱ لْـ ُـم ـب ـَ ِّـرِح َمــا ِعـْنـ ِـدي‬‫يل ِم ـ َـن ٱ لـ َّ‬   ‫إِ َّ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                    ‫ـرِة ن ـَـ ْل ــتَ ـ ِـق ــي‬   ‫ِ‬                              ‫ِ‬                           ‫ِ‬
                                                 ‫إل ـ ـي ـْ ـ َـهـ ــا فَـ ــفـ ــي َح ـ ـ ِّـر ٱل ـ ـظَّـ ـهـ ـ َ‬
      ‫َص ـ ـ َـد ِق ٱلْـ َـو ْع ـ ِـد‬                             ‫ِ ِ ِ‬
                                       ‫بَـ ْـيـ َـمــتـ َـهــا س ـ ًّـرا َع ـلَــى أ ْ‬
                      ‫فـَـتـُـ ْل ـ ِـق ــي َونـُـ ْل ـ ِـق ــي َم ــا نُـ َـاقِــي ِم ـ َـن ٱ ْلَـ َـوى‬
      ‫َّة ٱلْـب ـَ ْلـ َـوى َوِم ـ ْـن أَ َِل ٱلْـ َـو ْجـ ِـد‬
                                                           ‫وِم ــن ِش ــد ِ‬
                                                                    ‫َ ْ‬
                   ‫ـام ـ ٍـة‬                               ‫ـاث أ ْ ٍ‬
                         ‫َح ـ ـ ـ ـ َـام أَبـُ ـ ـ ْش ـ ـ َـرى َم ــنَ ـ َ‬                    ‫أَأ ْ‬
                                                                           ‫َضـ ـ ـ ــغَـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـان َك ــا َن ِف نُـطْـ ِـقـ ِـه َسـ ْـعـ ِـدي‬      ‫أَنُـطْــق َزم ـ ٍ‬
                                                              ‫ُ َ‬
                   ‫ـس ــوق ـُ َـه ــا‬      ‫ِ‬               ‫لَ ـ َـع ـ َّـل ٱلّـ ـ ـ ِـذي َس ـ ـ َ‬
                                   ‫ـاق ْٱل ََم ـ ـ ــان يَـ ُ‬
      ‫ض َها ِيل َج َن ٱ لْ َوْرِد‬                        ‫ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
                                         ‫عيَا نًا ف ـَي ـُ ْـهــد ي َرْو ُ‬




‫‪230‬‬
Red Rise




Eastwind fragrance, bring the gazelles of Najd
this word, that I, as they know me, am faithful


Tell the girl of the tribe we’ll meet early
Saturday morning, in the Najdian hills


Near the trail-­stone at the red rise
to the right of the flood beds and lonely ruin


If, as you say, it’s true that she suffers
the same desire as I do and burns


We’ll shade together in her tent                             [5]
fulfilling the promise we made


We’ll tell of our longings, our tribulations
our trances, aches, and fevers—dream


stuff? signs from sleep bright with promise?
voice of a time that foretold my fortune?


May wishes’ shepherd lead them to day—
and her garden enclose me in roses




                                                  Red Rise   231
                                                                                             ‫‪58‬‬




                    ‫ـان َسـبِـيـ ُـل‬   ‫ٱلِــس ـ ِ‬    ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬
                                           ‫أ ََل َه ـ ْـل إ َل ٱ ل ـ ُّـزْه ـر ْ َ‬
      ‫َو َه ـ ـ ْـل ِل َع ـلَــى آ ثـَ ــا ِرِهـ ـ َّـن َد ل ـيِـ ُـل‬



                     ‫ات ٱ لْلِ َوى ِم ْن ُم َعَّر ٍس‬  ‫وهــل ِل ِبيم ِ‬
                                                           ‫َْ َ‬    ‫ََ ْ‬
      ‫َو َه ـ ْـل ِل ِف ِظـ ِّـل ْٱلُثـَـ ْـي ـ ِـل َمـ ِـقـيـ ُـل‬



                                                   ‫ٱلـ ـ ـ ِ‬
                     ‫ـال ُيْـ ـ ـ ِـرُ أَنـَّـ َـه ــا‬                               ‫فـ ـ ـ َقـ ـ َ ِ‬
                                                                ‫ـسـ ــا ُن َْ‬    ‫ـال لـ ـ َ‬      ‫َ‬
      ‫ـول َتـَ ـ ـ َّـن َم ـ ــا إِلَـ ـ ْـي ـ ـ ِـه َس ـبِ ـي ـ ُـل‬
                                                                  ‫تـَـ ـ ـ ُقـ ـ ـ ُ‬



                    ‫يَا َغايَةَ ٱ لْ ُم َن‬           ‫ِو َد ِاد ي ص ِحيح فِ ِ‬
                                                     ‫يك‬       ‫َ ٌ‬
              ‫ِ‬
      ‫اك ٱ لْـ ـ ـ ـ ِو َد ِاد َعــل ـيـ ُـل‬
                                          ‫َذ َ‬       ‫َوق ـل ـِـي ِم ـ ْـن‬



‫]‪[5‬‬            ‫ب طَالِ ٍع‬  ‫ت ِم ْن بَ ْد ٍر َعلَى ٱ لْ َق ْل ِ‬  ‫تـعا لَي ِ‬
                                                                  ‫ََ ْ‬
                ‫ـس لَ ــهُ بـَـ ْـع ـ َـد ٱل ـطُّـلُـ ِ‬
      ‫ـوع أُفُ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـول‬                                              ‫ـ‬ ‫ـي‬
                                                     ‫ََ ْ َ‬‫ـ‬ ‫ل‬‫و‬




‫‪232‬‬
Is There a Way




Is there a way
   to those radiant graces,
a guide who’d track them
   to their place of rest


A haven from midday
   sun in the shade
of the persica by
   those tents near the dune?


A voice within
   told me her answer
Hope for what
   you may attain!


My love for you
   is strong and in it
I’m stricken     You
   are my desire


You are the full moon                            [5]
   risen within me,
risen and never
   to decline




                                Is There a Way   233
                                                   ‫فَ َد يـتُ ِ‬
              ‫ك يَا َم ْن َعَّز ُح ْسنًا َو َنْ َوًة‬   ‫ْ‬
      ‫يل‬ ‫ان ع ِ‬
         ‫د‬   ‫ٱلِس ِ‬    ‫ْ‬     ‫ـن‬ ‫ـ‬ ‫ب‬ ‫ه‬‫َ‬‫ل‬ ‫س‬  ‫ي‬ ‫ل‬
                                             ‫َ‬ ‫ـ‬‫ف‬
      ‫َ ْ َ ُ َْ َ َ َ ُ‬



                       ‫ول َوَوْرُد ِك يَانِ ٌع‬         ‫ضِ‬
                                              ‫ك َمطْلُ ٌ‬ ‫فـََرْو ُ‬
      ‫وق َعلَْي ِه قـَبُ ُ‬
      ‫ول‬                   ‫ك َم ْع ُش ٌ‬    ‫وحسنُ ِ‬
                                               ‫َُْ‬



                           ‫ك نَ ِ‬
                        ‫اع ٌم‬   ‫وَز ْهر ِك ب َّسام وغُصنُ ِ‬
                                    ‫َ ُ َ ٌَ ْ‬
                 ‫َتِـيـ ُـل لَــهُ ْ َ ُ َ ْ ُ‬
      ‫ـث َيِـيـ ُـل‬‫ـ‬ ‫ـ‬
                    ‫ـي‬ ‫ح‬   ‫اح‬‫و‬  ‫ٱل‬
                               ‫َر‬ ‫ْ‬



                   ‫صا ِرٌم‬     ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬
                         ‫َوظُْرفُك فـَتَّا ٌن َوطَْرفُك َ‬
      ‫ول‬
      ‫ص ُ‬‫لي يَ ُ‬
              ‫س ٱ لْبـَْل َوى َع َّ‬ ‫ِِ ِ‬
                                  ‫به فَا ر ُ‬




‫‪234‬‬
I ransom my life
   for you, asking
nothing but beauty
   in return


Your dewy garden
   glistens, your rose
unfolds, and all
   the world adores you


Your flowers gleam
   Your boughs are tender
Spirits bend
   with them as they sway


Your charm lures
   Your glances pierce
Tribulation’s rider
   charges me




                            Is There a Way   235
                                                                                                     ‫‪59‬‬




                 ‫صـ ـ ـ ــا ِرٍم‬
                               ‫ـي ظُـ ـ ـ ـ َـى َ‬
                                                                                          ‫ِ‬
                                                 ‫لـ ـ ـطَـ ـ ْـي ـ ــبَـ ـ ـةَ ظَـ ـ ـ ـ ْ ٌ‬
               ‫َتَ ـ ـ َّـرَد ِم ـ ْـن طَـ ْـرفِـ َـه ــا ٱلـ َّ‬
           ‫ـسـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاح ـ ِر‬

                     ‫ـت ٱ لّـ ـ ِـذ ي‬                     ‫ٍ‬
                                    ‫َوِف َع ـ ـ َـرفَـ ــات َع ـ ـ َـرفْ ـ ـ ُ‬
                  ‫َك بِــٱ ل ـ َّ‬
      ‫ـص ــا بِ ـ ِر‬            ‫تُـ ـ ِريـ ـ ُـد فَـ ـلَـ ـ ْـم أ ُ‬

              ‫َولَـ ـ ـ ـيـْـ ـ ـ ـلَـ ـ ـ ـ ِـة َجْ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٍع َجَـ ـ ـ ْـعـ ـ ــنَـ ـ ــا ِبـَ ـ ــا‬
      ‫ٱلسائِِر‬
           ‫َك َما َجاءَ ِف ٱ لْ َمثَ ِل َّ‬
                 ‫ـن فَـ ـ ـ َـا‬            ‫ِ ِ‬                                              ‫ِ‬
                                                                              ‫َيـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
                             ‫ـن ٱلْ ـ ـ ـ َف ـ ـ ــتَ ـ ـ ــاة َيـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ٌ‬
         ‫تَـ ـ ُك ــن تَ ـطْــم ــئِ ـ ُّـن إِ َل َغ ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاد ِر‬                         ‫ْ َ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬                  ‫ُم ـ ـ ـ ـ ًـى بِِـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ًـى نِ ـ ـ ْل ـ ـت ـُ ـ َـه ـ ــا لَـ ـ ْـي ـ ـت ـَ ـ َـهـ ــا‬
      ‫وم إِ َل ٱ لـ ـ َّـزَم ـ ـ ِن ْٱل ِخ ـ ـ ـ ِر‬                ‫تَـ ـ ـ ُـد ُ‬
                       ‫ـت ِف لَـ ـ ْـع ـ ـلَ ـ ـ ٍع بِـ ــٱ لَّـ ـ ِـي‬     ‫تـَـ ـ ـ َـولَّـ ـ ـ ْـع ـ ـ ـ ُ‬
      ‫ـك َس ــنَــا ٱلْ ـ َق ـ َـم ـ ِر ٱل ـ َّـز ِاه ـ ِر‬      ‫تُ ـ ِري ـ َ‬

                        ‫ـت بِــٱلـ َّ‬
                 ‫ـصــبَــا‬                    ‫ـت َر َامـ ـ ـ ـةً َو َ‬
                                   ‫صـ ــبَـ ـ ْ‬                    ‫َرَمـ ـ ـ ْ‬
           ‫ِ‬    ‫ـج ـ َـر بِـ ْ‬
      ‫ـٱلَــاج ـ ِر‬                    ‫ِ‬
                            ‫ٱلَـ ْ‬‫ـج ـ َـرت ْ‬   ‫َو َح ـ َّ‬

                 ‫ـت ب ـُـ َـريْـ ـ ًقـ ــا َعـ ـلَ ــى بَـ ــا ِرٍق‬   ‫َوشـ ـ َ‬
                                                                 ‫ـامـ ـ ْ‬
           ‫ِ‬                             ‫ِ‬
                ‫ع م ـ ْـن َخ ـطْـ َـرِة ْ‬
      ‫ٱلـَـاط ـ ِر‬                          ‫َس ـ َـر َ‬ ‫بِ ـأ ْ‬
                ‫ضى‬       ‫و َغاضت ِمياه ٱلْغَ ِ‬
                 ‫ضا م ْن َغ ً‬‫َ َ ْ َُ َ‬
           ‫َض ـلُــعِـ ِـه ِم ــن ه ــوى سـ ِ‬
      ‫ـاح ـ ِر‬                             ‫بِـأ ْ‬
               ‫ْ ًَ َ‬


‫‪236‬‬
I Came to Know




Táyban gazelles entrance with glances,
      sword edges flashing bright


At Árafa I saw what she wanted
      and lost all patience there


We joined her late one night in Jem
      as foretold down the generations


A maiden’s oath is but a promise
      Don’t trust in one who’ll desert you


The wishes I was granted in Mína—                                  [5]
      would they’d lasted till the end of time!


In Láʿlaʿ I was set aflame
      by one who shows the full moon rising


In Râma she searched, at Sába she burned,
      in Hājir she broke the seal


In Bāriq she saw the signs of lightning
      flash quicker than thought in the mind


The waters of Gháda were parched
      by desire aflame within me




                                                  I Came to Know   237
                      ‫ـت‬ ‫ـان ٱل ـن ـَّ َقــى فَــٱنْـتَـ َقـ ْ‬    ‫ـت بِــبـ ِ‬
‫]‪[10‬‬                                                                   ‫َوبَــانَـ ْ َ‬
                                                                   ‫ِ‬
            ‫َللـ ـ ـ ـ ــئ م ـ ـ ْكـ ــنُـ ــونَـ ـ ِـه ٱلْ ـ ـ َفـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاخـ ــر‬                                        ‫َ َ‬
                                              ‫ِ‬
                                   ‫ت بِ َذات ْٱل َ‬
                  ‫َضى ٱلْ َق ْه َقَرى‬                 ‫َو َ‬
                                                    ‫آض ْ‬
          ‫ٱل ـ ـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاد ِر‬      ‫ِ‬                ‫ِ‬             ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ح ـ ـ َذ ًارا م ـ ْـن ْٱل َ‬
               ‫َس ـ ــد َْ‬
                                                                         ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ـجـ ِـي‬
                             ‫ـت ُمـ ْـهـ َ‬              ‫بِـ ــذي َس ـلَ ـ ٍم أ ْ‬
                                           ‫َس ـلَـ َـم ـ ْ‬
                         ‫إِ َل َلـ ِـظــهــا ٱ لْ ـ َفــاتِـ ِ‬
       ‫ـك ٱ لْـ َفــاتِـ ِر‬                   ‫ْ َ‬
                    ‫ت بِــٱل ـلِّـ َـوى‬                      ‫َح ــت بِـ ِْ‬
                                      ‫ـٱلـ َـمــى َولَـ ـ َـو ْ‬        ‫َ‬
           ‫َكــع ـطْـ َفـ ِـة ج ــا ِر ِح ــه ــا ٱلْ ـ َكـ ِ‬
       ‫ـاس ـرِ‬              ‫َ َ‬                         ‫َ‬
                                                                       ‫ِ‬
                                             ‫َوِف َع ـ ــال ـ ـ ٍـج َع ـ ــا َلَـ ـ ْ‬
                       ‫ـت أ َْم ـ ـ َـرَه ـ ــا‬
       ‫ـب ٱل ـطَّــائِـ ِر‬   ‫ـت ِم ـ ْـن ِمْ ـلَـ ِ‬                 ‫ِ‬
                                                     ‫ل ـتـُـ ْف ـلَـ َ‬
‫]‪[15‬‬                      ‫َخ ـ ـ َـوْرنـَـ ـ ُق ـ ـ َـه ـ ــا َخ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا ِر ٌق لِ ـل ـ َّ‬
                ‫ـس ـ َـم ــا‬
          ‫ٱعتِ َل ء علَى ٱلن ِ‬
       ‫َّاظ ِر‬                                                 ‫ِ‬
                        ‫ء يَ ْس ُمو ْ ً َ‬




‫‪238‬‬
At White Dune’s moringa she departed                              [10]
      then gathered her choicest hidden pearls


At Dhāt al-­Áda she turned back,
      wary of a lion in wait


In Dhū Sálam she submitted my soul
      to her lethal gaze


At Híma stood watch and in Líwa swayed
      through the predator’s crush


In peril at ʿĀlij, she slipped
      through the raptor’s claws


Her Khawárnaq tower soars                                         [15]
      beyond the heavens




                                                 I Came to Know   239
                                                                                          ‫‪60‬‬




                             ‫ـاب َل ـُ ـ ْـم ِذ َمـ ـ ُـم‬
                                                      ‫َحـ ــبـ ـ ٍ‬   ‫ِ ِ ِ‬
                                                           ‫أَلْـ ــمـ ـ ْـم بَـ ـْن ـ ـ ِزل أ ْ َ‬
          ‫ِ‬                                           ‫ِ‬
                            ‫ـاب َ‬
      ‫صـ ْـوب ـُ َـهــا د َيُ‬        ‫ـحـ ٌ‬‫ـت َعـلـْـيــه َسـ َ‬     ‫َسـ َّ‬
                                                                ‫ـحـ ْ‬



                                          ‫ِمن تِْل َق ِ‬
                           ‫اء أ َْر ِض ِه ِم‬                     ‫يح‬   ‫ٱستـَْن ِش ِق ِّ‬
                                                    ‫ْ‬            ‫ٱلر َ‬              ‫َو ْ‬
                                              ‫ِ‬       ‫ِ‬
                           ‫ل ــتُـ ْ َ َ ْ َ ُ‬
      ‫اح أَيْـ ـ َـن ُه ـ ُـم‬  ‫و‬ ‫َر‬ ‫ٱل‬
                                     ‫ْ‬    ‫ك‬ ‫ـر‬   ‫ـ‬ ‫ـخ‬            ‫َش ـ ْـوقًــا‬



                                       ‫أَظُـن ـُّـه ــم خ ـيَّــم ـوا بِــٱلْــب ـ ِ ِ‬
                            ‫ـان م ـ ْـن إِ َ‬
                       ‫ض ـ ٍم‬                ‫َ‬              ‫ُْ َ ُ‬
      ‫ِّيح َوٱ لْ َكتَ ُم‬
                     ‫ُ‬ ‫ٱلش‬     ‫ث‬    ‫ي‬
                                ‫َحْي ُ ََ ُ َ َ ْ ُ‬
                                      ‫ح‬ ‫و‬ ‫ار‬  ‫ر‬   ‫ع‬‫ْ‬‫ل‬ ‫ٱ‬  ‫ث‬




‫‪240‬‬
Artemisia and Arâr




Pass by the lovers’ station
   where covenants are kept
   Let it be blessed
by quenching rains


Breathe in the spirits
   that hail from their lands
   and long to know
where your loves have gone


Their tents perhaps pitched
   near Ídam’s moringa
   on grounds dappled
with artemisia and arâr




                                Artemisia and Arâr   241
                                                                                                        ‫‪61‬‬




                    ‫أ ََل يـَ ـ ـ ــا بـَ ـ ـ ــا نَـ ـ ـ ـةَ ٱ لْـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـو ِاد ي‬
      ‫ـاط ــي نـَـ ْـهـ ـ ِر بـَـ ـ ْغـ ـ َـد ِاد‬ ‫ـش ـ ِ‬   ‫بِـ َ‬
                                        ‫ِ ِ‬
                     ‫ـج ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـان فـ ـ ـ ـي ـ ـ ــك نـَـ ـ ـيَّـ ـ ـ ٌ‬
                     ‫ـاح‬                                               ‫َش ـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
      ‫طَـ ـ ـ ـ ــروب فـ ـ ـ ـ ــو َق م ـ ـيَّـ ــادِ‬
                    ‫ُ ٌ َ ْ َ‬

            ‫يـُ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َذ ِّك ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ُـرِن ت ـَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـرُّنـُـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــهُ‬
       ‫ت ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــرُّن ربـَّ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ِـة ٱلـ ـ ـنَّ ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـادي‬                                       ‫َ ََ َ‬
             ‫ت ِم ـ ــثَـ ــا لِ ـ ـثَـ ـ َـه ـ ــا‬          ‫إِ َذ ا َسـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َّـو ْ‬
       ‫فَـ َـا تَـ ْذ ُكــر أَخ ــا ٱ ْل ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـادي‬‫ْ َ َ‬
‫]‪[5‬‬          ‫ت بـ ـن ـَـ ْغ ـ َـم ــتِ ـ َـه ــا‬
                                               ‫ـاد ْ‬‫َوإِ ْن َج ـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
       ‫ٱل ـ ـ ِ‬
      ‫ـادي‬  ‫ـش ـ ـةُ َْ‬        ‫فَ ـ َـم ـ ْـن أ َْنَـ ـ َ‬
                     ‫ات ِم ْن َس ْل َمى‬           ‫ضم ِ‬           ‫بِ ِذ ي ْ ِ‬
                                                           ‫ٱلَ َ‬
      ‫َيِـ ـ ـي ـ ــنً ـ ــا ُثَّ ِس ـ ـ ـ ـ ـْنـ ـ ـ ـ ـ َـد ا ِد‬

                                      ‫ـحـ ـ ُ‬
                 ‫ـت َم ـ ْش ــغُــوفًــا‬              ‫لَـ ـ َق ـ ـ ْد أ ْ‬
                                           ‫َصـ ــبَـ ـ ْ‬
      ‫ِب ـ ــن س ـ َك ــن ــت بِـ ـأَج ــي ــادِ‬
            ‫َ ْ َ َ ْ َْ‬
                                                                             ‫ِ‬
            ‫ـت‬‫َغ ـ ــل ـ ـطْـ ــنَ ـ ــا إَِّنـَـ ـ ـ ـ ـ ــا َسـ ـ ـ َك ـ ــنَ ـ ـ ْ‬
       ‫ـب أَ ْكــبـ ِ‬               ‫ِ‬
      ‫ـادي‬ ‫ُسـ َـويْـ َـدا خـ ْلـ ِ َ‬
            ‫ـال ِبَـ ــا‬                ‫ـاه ْ‬
                      ‫ٱلَـ ـ ـ َـم ـ ـ ـ ُ‬   ‫لَـ ـ ـ َقـ ـ ـ ْد تَـ ـ ـ ـ َ‬
        ‫ِ‬
      ‫ٱلَاد ي‬
           ‫ك َو ْ‬             ‫ِ‬
                     ‫اح ٱ لْم ْس ُ‬       ‫َوفَ َ‬

‫‪242‬‬
Tigris Song




O moringa of the flood-­bed
at the Tigris’s banks


The cry of a dove on a swaying bough
saddens my heart


Her song’s like the song
of the assembly’s queen


At the sound of her oud, you’ll
forget the music of al-­Rashīd


And when she sings, the chants                       [5]
of Ánjash fade


In Khadimāt, Sálma’s direction,
and in Sindād, I swear,


I’m gone for a girl
in Ajyâdī


No, she dwells within
my liver’s black bile


In a rush of saffron and musk
beauty falls bewildered




                                       Tigris Song   243
Notes to the Poems


Poem 1. This poem, and with it the Tarjumān as a whole, begins with the
poet asking where his beloved and her company might be in their journey
away from him. That motif establishes the Tarjumān’s first-­order poetics
in which the lover is voiced as male, and the beloved primarily (although
not exclusively) as female. The poet may refer to the beloved in the sin-
gular or the plural. Thus, the plural “if they knew” refers to a specific
group, the women of the tribe who, accompanied by male camel-­drivers
or guides, would travel together, shielded from the elements and from the
gaze within their howdahs. “They” can then refer to the ensemble or to
the beloved specifically. In many Tarjumān poems, the lover has his own
ensemble with the companions who are asked to share the poet’s grief.
    Verse 4 introduces the bewilderment that inflects poems throughout
the Tarjumān. Lovers, referred to grandly as the “lords of love” (arbāb
al-­hawā), are ensnared and bewildered by that which they should master.
In the Tarjumān, bewilderment comes in many forms and goes by many
names, as the poet and even beauty itself find themselves perplexed,
speechless, astonished, or lost.

Poem 2. This poem begins with “the moment of departure,” when the
beloved and the other women of the tribe mount into their elaborately
brocaded camel palanquins, before being led away by their camel-­guides.
The poem then shifts through a range of Qur’anic and cultic allusions, first
and foremost to the Queen of Sheba, who is unnamed in the Qur’an
but known in the tradition as Bilqīs. She first appears in verse 2, when
peacock-­like beauties in their howdahs are said to “Take possession / with
glances that kill / like Bilqīs of Sheba / on her throne of pearl.” The
Qur’anic story of Bilqīs (Q 27:15–44) culminates with Bilqīs having sub-
mitted (aslamtu) along with the prophet Sulaymān to the one God. Bilqīs
continues to hover over the central verses of the poem before reemerging
explicitly at the end.



                                                                        245
    Idrīs is a prophet mentioned twice in the Qur’an (Q 19:56–57; 21:85–
86); he was associated in tradition with the biblical Enoch and the Greek
Hermes, especially within the Arabic traditions surrounding Hermes Tris-
megistus. In hadith and biographical accounts of Muḥammad’s heavenly
ascent, Idrīs appears as the prophet of the fourth heaven, which was
viewed as the sphere of the sun.
    In verse 4, the poet compares this goddess-­like figure to the Qur’anic
ʿĪsā, who is able to bring the dead to life. He then associates her with the
tablets of the Torah. From there the transformations pick up speed. She
appears as a bishop; as the daughter of the Rūm or Byzantine Christians;
as a being bathed in the light of the nāmūs, which is associated in both
Christian and Islamic traditions with the Holy Spirit; as an anchorite who
retreats to a tomb (specifically a marble mausoleum) in contemplation;
and as a personification of wisdom who baffles Muslim sages as well as
rabbis, psalmists, and priests. She is a being of such magnetic power that,
were she to show an interest in the gospel, the lover and his companions
would appear suddenly as church dignitaries.
    Verse 10 returns to the moment of separation, with the poet begging
the camel-­driver not to lead his beloved away. In verse 12, at the point of
death, the poet pleads with her to release him. She yields, relents, or sub-
mits (aslamat in the past tense)—just as Bilqīs had submitted to the one
God along with Sulaymān.
    The poems ends with a reference to Iblīs, the Lucifer-­like figure in the
Qur’an who refused the divine command to bow before Adam, was cast
from his high station, and became the tempter of humankind. (“May salva-
tion’s angel”: other readings have malik [king] in place of malak [angel].)
    Why would the poet ask for release on the point of death, which
throughout the Tarjumān can reflect his passing away in union with the
beloved? In Priceless Treasures, Ibn ʿArabī explains the poet’s hesitation
as due to his fear of ḥulūl, which occurs when the mystic believes he has
become one with an incarnate God. He also quotes a hadith according to
which the prophet Muḥammad says to God, “I take refuge from you in
you” (aʿūdhu bika minka).

Poem 3. This poem opens and closes with the poet asking his companions
to contact his beloved(s) or those who might know where the beloved’s
party has gone. The first site of the longed-­for contact is Mecca, the evoca-
tion of which leads to the scene of the lover’s self-­sacrifice at the hajj.


246 Notes to the Poems
Verses 2–4 evoke several core rites: the casting of pebbles at the stone
cairns of Minā, near the station of Muḥaṣṣab; the drinking from the waters
of Zamzam spring, which in the Qur’anic account was opened miracu-
lously when Hājar and her son Ismāʿīl were about to perish from thirst;
“fasts,” which refer to the daily acts of fasting (ṣawm) obligatory through-
out the month of Ramaḍān and are viewed as a voluntary act of piety
during periods of the hajj. “Feast” (ʿīd) is the term used for the sacrifice
and shared consumption of a camel, sheep, or goat in remembrance of
Abraham’s sacrifice, an event that culminates the pilgrimage experience
at the hajj and is carried out on the same day by nonpilgrims across the
world. Verse 2, “my hajj”: more fully “my hajj and ʿumra.” ʿUmra, the vol-
untary minor pilgrimage, centers on the circumambulation of the Kaʿba
and the running back and forth between the two hills in remembrance of
Hājar’s search for water. It can be carried out directly after the hajj, or
separately throughout the year outside of the hajj season. (On the lover’s
self-­sacrifice during the hajj, see Muṣṭafā Shaybī’s commentary on verses
attributed to al-­Ḥallāj on that same theme, in the course of which Shaybī
offers several examples from later poets. Kāmil Muṣṭafā Shaybī, Sharḥ
dīwān al-­Ḥallāj [Paris: Manshūrāt Asmār, 2005], 366–37.)
    After the hajj verses, the poet resumes his journey by proxy, calling on
the driver of the camel-­train to travel through various desert sites in search
of the beloved and her party. (Whose camel train: the beloved’s or the
poets, or in the poet’s mind at least, both.) In the event that the driver’s
shouted greetings are not returned, the poet begs him to call out the
names of the beloveds of the past: “Daʿd and Rabáb, / Záynab and Hind, /
Lúbna, then Sálma.” Lubnā was the beloved of the poet Qays ibn Durayd,
and their tale is told in the Great Book of Songs. (The phrase wa zamzami
at the end of the verse is not a reference to Zamzam spring but is an im-
perative verb meaning to “ring forth.”)
    Hálba (Ḥalba, v. 10) is a district on the southwestern side of the Tigris
River in Baghdad. Its mention here, along with other references to sites
in or near Baghdad (as in poems 54, 56, and 61), has enhanced interest in
the possibility that Niẓām may have been living in the Baghdad area after
her time in Mecca.

Poems 4–6. These poems begin a pattern within the Tarjumān with short
lyrical interludes alternating with longer and more complex poems. Poem
4 opens in jinās mode with the s/l/m and ḥ/l/l consonants echoing one


                                                        Notes to the Poems 247
another throughout the verse: salāmun ʿalā salmā wa man ḥalla bi-­l-­ḥimā
wa ḥuqqa li-­mithlī an yusallima: “Peace [be to] Sálma / and Peace to
those / who halt at al-­Híma / It’s right I greet you.” Tucked within these
phonetic fireworks is what may be a rejoinder to Qurrat al-­ʿAyn who, in
the preface devoted to her, had rebuked Ibn ʿArabī by declaring that it was
not fitting “for one like you (mithlak) to speak in such a way.” Here the
poet responds that it is right for one like me (mithlī) to greet you. The
poem ends with the voice of the beloved breaking in to respond to the
lover’s complaint. She does so by emphasizing the paradox of shawq that
recurs at other critical moments in the Tarjumān: “Each moment he / be-
holds me anew / in his heart, she said / What more can he ask?”

Poem 5 opens with the binary relationship between the Arabian uplands
of Najd and the region of Tihām (more fully, Tihāma), the coastal plain
along the Red Sea. The poet intensifies the theme by following the men-
tion of Najd and Tihāma with two Arabic verbs based on the n/j/d and
t/h/m roots. Anjada: “to ascend in travel” or “to travel to the highlands of
Najd.” Athama denotes the descending movement of travel or, more spe-
cifically, travel to the lowland, coastal region of Tihāma.

Poem 6 begins by extending the theme of patience that concluded the
previous poem. Verse 1 takes shape around the double meaning of the
Arabic verb bāna, one of many classical Arabic words that carry opposite
meanings. Bāna can mean either “to appear, become present” or “to de-
part, become absent.” In either case, the beloveds who are gone live still
or once lived (the time frame is indefinite) within the grieving lover. Verse
2 extends the verbal play on bāna by mentioning the moringa (bān), a
mention intensified by its placement in verse-­end rhyming position. The
final verse takes on a particular poignancy, given that those who are gone
may represent not only the beloved and her party but all the friends and
loved ones of the poet’s past.

Poem 7. The poet returns to the hajj motifs found in poem 3 but in a new
key, with huri-­like figures opening and closing the poem. The various hajj
rites unfold verse-­by-­verse through the body of the poem: the touching of
the black stone in the Kaʿba wall during the ritual circumambulation; the
march from ʿArafa (which can also be spelled ʿArafat) to Minā; the casting
of pebbles at Minā’s three cairns; the “standing” at ʿArafa for most of a day;


248 Notes to the Poems
and partaking of waters from the Zamzam spring. Here the poet, rather than
offering himself for sacrifice, risks perishing at the sight of unveiled beauty.
By this point in the Tarjumān, a pattern has been established, with the lover
encountering death or dying at the center of many of poems. If he has in
fact perished, that leaves his continuing voice in verses that follow as a sort
of ghostly presence or else, as some poems will later suggest, as part of a
continual process of dying and being brought back to life. If he resists gazing
at these personifications of beauty, he has, at the very least, fallen deep into
lovesickness.
    Two poems from ʿUmar ibn abī Rabīʿa offer a possible subtext for
poems 3 and 7 in the Tarjumān: ʿUmar ibn Abī Rabīʿa, Dīwān (Beirut: Dār
Bayrūt li-­ṭ-­ṭibāʿas wa-­n-­nashr, 1984), 399 and 422.

Poem 8: This deceptively simple poem begins with a mournful nasib in
pre-­Islamic style. The poet gestures toward the aṭlāl, then points to his
own tears shed in memory of his beloved and all those associated with
the remembered or imagined time of intimacy and belonging. He then
tells of his reaction to the beloved’s departure. As verse 4 transitions into
verse 5, there is a shift in time as the poet turns to address the beloved
directly.
    The words “aflame / with ceaseless sorrow” lead naturally to the refer-
ences to fire in verse 6, but the continuity in fire imagery is accompanied
by a shift in address with the introduction of a new character, the fire-­
striker (mūqida n-­nār), who in the premodern context would bring up
images of a person striking flint or rubbing sticks together. The fire-­striker
should take it easy, the poet tells him, for right “here” (that is, here with
the poet or, as Ibn ʿArabī glosses the verse in his commentary, “here in
my heart”) is passion’s fire. The fire-­striker need only take an ember from
it to start a fire of his own. Here, the love-­poet launches a twofold boast.
As a lover, he brings his own fire, a fire from which any less passionate
lover might borrow a flame. As a poet, his words burn with poetic fire,
from which other poets might borrow a flame.
    The Arabic iqtabasa means “to take an ember” but carries wider
meanings as well: “to borrow from”; “to emulate”; “to study under” (in
the sense of a student studying under the master of a particular disci-
pline); “to quote”; and in literary-­critical discourse, “to embed words or
phrases from the Qur’an within a literary text.” In classical Arabic poetry,
an analogy to prophetic revelation could serve to intensify the poetic


                                                        Notes to the Poems 249
boast, and in this poem Ibn ʿArabī provides a subtle example. The second
half of verse 6 evokes the Qur’anic story of Mūsā and the fire. “Here is
passion’s fire / Just take an ember” (hādhihi nāru al-­ṣabābati shaʾnakum
an taqtabisu). In Q 20:9, Mūsā tells his journey companions to stay be-
hind while he investigates a fire that he has discerned in the distance.
Perhaps, he says, the fire he discerns may provide an ember (qabas) for
his group or may offer guidance (al-­hudā). (See also Q 27:8; Q 28:29.)
When Mūsā approaches the fire, the divine voice addresses him, reveal-
ing the identity of the one God and commissioning him with the message
he will deliver to Pharaoh. By the twelfth century, the analogy between
Mūsā’s fire and the fire within the lover’s heart had become a core motif
within Arabic love poetry.
   The fire in the lover’s heart introduced here recurs in other poems in
the Tarjumān, with each occurrence resonating with earlier instances and
foreshadowing later ones. That fire (erotic, poetic, prophetic, and mysti-
cal) passes its embers from one poem to another within the Tarjumān
even as it borrows embers from the Qur’an and earlier poets.
   For more on the motif of Mūsā’s fire and the lover, see Emil Homerin,
“A Distant Fire: Ibn al-­Shahrazūrī’s Mystical Ode and Arabic Sufi Verse,”
Journal of Sufi Studies, 4:1 (2015): 27–58.

Poem 9. This poem opens with the interpermeation of the natural and the
human that will recur in other poems in the Tarjumān. It concludes in
verse 5 with an image of monumental splendor as figures of beauty pose
poetically like the graces in Renaissance art. In the case of the Tarjumān,
however, these beauties are described through allusions to Qur’anic
verses on the huris of paradise who appear as the archetypes of beauty
and acceptance (Q 37:48–49). Verse 5 also echoes the opening and closing
of poem 7 even as it foreshadows the central section of poem 12.

Poem 10. These two verses form an apparently simple repartee. In verse
1, the beloved rebukes the poet. The lover’s response, “You’re seeing your-
self / in the mirror / of humankind,” is rooted in a play on the word
insān—a word that can mean “a human being,” “humankind” in general,
or “pupil of the eye.” Poets and Sufis had long played on the metaphorical
aspects of the mirror reflection. When you see yourself in the mirror, the
self you see in the mirror is looking at you.



250 Notes to the Poems
   The unnamed lady is said to see her own reflection in the mirror of a
human being insān. Insān is always gender nonspecific. It is also a word
with deep Qur’anic resonance, as in Q 81:5 when the divine voice asks its
human creation, “O human being, what has led you away from your gener-
ous lord,” suggesting that insān can designate the human condition.
   The mystical possibilities of this couplet will be drawn out further in
poem 11. A bridge is provided by the word “garden.” In his commentary
to poem 10, Ibn ʿArabī writes that the vision of the divine beloved in his
heart/eye is nothing other than the vision of the afterlife garden of the
blessed as well as the garden of Eden. In poem 11, the poet declares his
own amazement at “a garden among the flames” and proceeds to proclaim
that his heart has become receptive of every form. For a discussion of the
complete human being and the mirror image in the mystical thought of
Ibn ʿArabī, see Michael Sells, Mystical Languages of Unsaying (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994), chapter 3 (“Identity Shift and Meaning
Event”), 63–89.

Poem 11. This poem, the keystone of the Tarjumān, takes us through a
series of quietly spectacular transformations and reversals. In the first
three verses, the poet engages in a dialogue with mournful doves of the
moringa and the persica (arāk), a tree or large shrub that in the nasib came
to be associated with the smile of the beloved. In verse 4, spirits howl and
mourn in the branches of a third tree, the gháda (ghadā), which was val-
ued for its shade and for use as cooking coals. In the Tarjumān, it is associ-
ated with the fire in the lover’s heart and, in the commentary and other
writings of Ibn ʿArabī, with the burning bush from which God addressed
Mūsā (Q 20:11–14; 27:8–10; 28:30–31). As the spirits rustle and bend the
branches, they bring the poet through the experience of “passing away”
( fanāʾ).
    At this point, the poet echoes poems 3 and 7 and foreshadows later
poems by situating himself within the hajj. Two stations are mentioned:
Jem (al-­jamʿ, “the union,” “the assembly”) is an epithet for Muzdalifa, a
site on the hajj route toward Minā where the vast numbers of pilgrims
who have been traveling in staggered groups come together. Muhássab
(al-­muḥaṣṣab) is a site just nearby where the pilgrims gather the pebbles
that they will cast at the three cairns (since reinforced as large pillars) of
Minā. Equally significant are the two sites not necessarily associated with



                                                       Notes to the Poems 251
the hajj: Naʿmān and Tamarisk, which both mark times spent with or near
the beloved. The verse elicits a homology between the hajj, in which pil-
grims ritually approach the divine beloved, and the lover’s pilgrim-­like
effort to follow the beloved along her journey away from him back to the
lost time of union.
    The hajj experience and the identity of the poet shift in verse 5, as the
poet now speaks not of lovers and pilgrims performing the hajj but of his
heart as the Kaʿba around which spirits or beloveds circle. Who are they
who circle his heart? The most immediate possible antecedent of “they”
is “the spirits.” The image here recalls the Qur’anic depictions of the ce-
lestial temple around which angels circle and into which they disappear.
But the verses that follow suggest that it is huri-­like beauties who circle
his heart. No longer is the poet as lover wandering Arabia in search of the
lost beloved. No longer is he a pilgrim at the hajj. Rather, his heart has
become the Kaʿba, the goal and still center of all movement. Here the
poem enacts the Sufi idea, mentioned throughout Ibn ʿArabī’s writings,
that the greatest Kaʿba is the heart of the human being at the threshold of
mystical union. The next two verses evoke the lover’s complaint about the
deceptiveness of the beloved’s promise. Then, as is if in continuation of
the same thought but in a reversal of it, the poet expresses wonder at the
gazelle (a figure somewhere between a metaphor and an epithet for the
beloved), who engages in the sign language and subtle communication
that had long been a motif in ghazal poetry. (For a classic example, see
ʿUmar ibn abī Rabīʿ, Dīwān, 344–45.)
    Verses 10–13 form one of the most anthologized passages in Arabic
poetry and especially in Sufi literature, though much is lost when those
verses are shorn of the rest of poem. The verses begin with a play on the
gazelle figure and the fire within the poet’s heart, a play that will anchor
other poems in the Tarjumān: “A pasture between / breastbone and
spine / Marvel, a garden / among the flames.” See also poem 20, verses
6–7: “My father’s life, / my own! for / a gazelle browsing / within my
ribs / What burns for her / there is light / and only light / can quell this
fire.”
    Beginning the next verse, with “My heart can take on / any form,” the
poet proceeds to recall the sacred texts and sites of veneration that his
heart can take on. He then declares the religion of love (dīn al-­ḥubb)—
even as he recalls beliefs and practices that sounded through poem 2, al-
beit in a different key.


252 Notes to the Poems
    The poem concludes with an homage to the lover/beloved pairs of the
past. Bishr and Hind, like Qays and Laylā, are poet/beloved pairs from the
early ghazal tradition whose stories were elaborated in the Great Book of
Songs. Ghaylān (Ghaylān Ibn ʿUqba, d. ca. 735 ce), popularly known as
Dhū al-­Rumma, was considered the last representative of the early Arabic
Bedouin ode. His odes consisted almost exclusively of the nasib and raḥīl
(journey-­quest). Rather than returning from the isolation of the solitary
journey to celebrate the tribe or to present a missive to the ruler, however,
this poet-­lover journeys ceaselessly after the beloved Mayya and back to
the times spent with her. (For an introduction to and translation of one of
Dhū al-­Rumma’s odes, see Michael Sells, Desert Tracings: Six Classic Ara-
bian Odes [Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1989], 68–76.)
    These classic lover-­pairs serve as the poet’s model (uswa), exemplars
of the worldly and unworldly love celebrated in the Tarjumān. A couplet
of Qays (Majnūn Laylā) in which he compares himself to an Udhrī lover-­
poet named ʿUrwa is particularly relevant to the dynamism of poem 11,
with its emphasis on continual death and rebirth as the protean heart of
the lover or mystic takes on ever new forms: “I marvel that ʿUrwa the
ʿUdhrī / became a legend for generations / He died, comfortably, one
time / while I die anew each day” (Dīwān Majnūn Laylā, edited by Yūsuf
Farḥat [Beirut: Dar li-­kitāb al-­ʿArabī, 1994], 221).
    As a whole, poem 11 consists of several movements. The dove scene
(verses 1–3) establishes an intense emotional register. In verses 4–5, the
poet “passes away” amid the moaning of spirits in the ghaḍā branches and,
in a ghostly fashion, suffers torments after he has expired and anticipates
new ordeals along the hajj stations (verse 6). The evocation of the hajj sets
the stage for the radical transformation of verse 7, where the poet no
longer speaks about the Kaʿba but as the Kaʿba. With verse 8 the lover’s
complaint about the beloved(s) turns to wonderment. He announces that
his heart has become receptive of every form, unfolds the various forms
it takes, and professes a “religion of love” modeled by the legendary lovers
of the past.
    Readers of other editions and translations of this poem will note the
absence of two verses in this translation. The verses appear neither in the
historic manuscripts of the Tarjumān nor in the version of poem 11 in
Sessions of the Righteous. They do appear in Priceless Treasures, but without
comment other than the statement that the meaning of the verses needed
no explanation.


                                                      Notes to the Poems 253
   In other editions and translations, the verses follow the reference in
verse 7 to spirits or beloveds circling the poet’s heart. The poet states that
these beings circled his heart just as the “Best of Creation” (an epithet for
the prophet Muḥammad) circled the Kaʿba—a construction of mere
stones that the intellect would consider unworthy of veneration. Yet the
Prophet was nātiq, which means rational or capable of speech, the Arabic
term used by philosophers who defined the human being as a rational/
speaking animal. The verses read: “As the Best of Creation / circled the
Káʿba / which reason and its proofs / would deem unworthy / And kissed
stones there / he! a voice of reason / and what is the House [an epithet
for the Káʿba] / compared to human being?”

                                                           ‫ـاف َخ ــرُ آ ّلَـ ْل ـ ِـق بِـ ْلـ َكـ ْـعــبَـ ِـة‬
                                                                                                            َ ‫َكـ َـمــا طَ ـ‬
                ِ ‫ـول دلِـيــل آلْــع ـ ْقـ ِـل فِـيــهــا بِـن ـ ْقــصـ‬
                ‫ـان‬ َ ُ َ                            َ ُ َ ُ ‫الَّ ـ ِـي يـَـ ُق ـ‬
                                                                ِ ‫وق ـ ـبَّـ ــل أَحـ ــجـ ــارا ِبـ ــا وهـ ـ ــو نَـ‬
                                                         ‫ـاط ـ ٌـق‬         َ َْ َ ً َ ْ َ َ َ
                ِ‫ـت ِمـ ــن قَـ ـ ـ ْد ِر إِنْ ــس ــان‬
                                                     ِ ‫وأَيـ ـ ــن مـ ـ َق ـ ِـام آلْـ ـبـ ــي ـ‬
                      َ                      ْ           َْ                        َ َ َْ
Poem 12. This poem takes up themes and images from poem 2, but in a
different key. At its heart is an interplay between human and nonhuman
realms of creation as well as in the tension between a transcendent reality
and the manifestation of that transcendent reality within the world, and
more specifically within the marble or porcelain figures mentioned in the
first verse. It then extends that tension to the three-­in-­one being pro-
claimed in various Christian theologies, a triplicity mirrored in the poet’s
personae as gazelle-­minder, astrologer, and monk. Statues: al-­dumā, re-
ferring to the statues or figurines that Ibn ʿArabī associated with Christian
veneration in greater Syria.
    For the use of dumya / dumā in the poetry of medieval Islamic Spain,
see Henri Pérès, La poésie andalouse en arabe classique au XIe siècle; ses
aspects généraux, ses principaux thèmes et sa valeur documentaire (Paris:
Maisonneuve, 1953), 178, 181, 334–43. And for al-­dumā in early ghazal
poetry, see ʿUmar ibn Abī Rabīʿa, Dīwān, 293–94.

Poem 13. The first four verses of this poem return to the mournful col-
loquy between the poet and dove or doves, and in this case enact that
colloquy through an embedded dialogue. In verse 5, the poet recalls his


254 Notes to the Poems
experience at ʿĀlij, the immense sand desert known today as the Nefūd,
just north of the medieval pilgrimage route from Mecca and Medina to
Iraq. The rest of the poem proceeds in classical nasib style. Verse 8 recalls
the trauma of the day of separation (yawm al-­bayn). Verses 9–10 recall
the beloved’s party’s journey away from the poet, a scene that extends the
poet’s memory into the realm of imagination, given that the poet-­lover
would not have been traveling with that caravan and could not, strictly
speaking, remember it. Verse 11 presents desert travelers tightening the
saddles and loosening the reins at the start of the journey or else, once the
journey is underway, increasing the camels’ pace. The reference could be
to the journey of the beloved’s party or to the journey undertaken by the
poet and his companions to rejoin the beloved, a journey that, within the
nasib world of the poem, is unending. In verse 10, the poet finds the
“death’s cords” before him. By this point in the Tarjumān, the lover’s en-
counter with death has emerged as a pattern, evoked most often in a single
verse at a moment of particular emotional intensity within a given poem.

Poem 14. This poem is rooted in protocols of hadith transmission, which
came to be used for a variety of orally transmitted reports, whether or not
they constituted hadiths in the formal sense. Such reports consisted of
two parts: the chain of transmitters that, by Ibn ʿArabī’s time, could span
more than six centuries, and the speech that was being reported, ideally
in the form of verbatim quotation. Reports of the verses and sayings for
the first generations of Muslim love poets were gathered, along with
chains of transmission, into immense works such as the Great Book of
Songs, even as love poets had begun presenting interiorized hadith con-
versations—a conceit that Ibn ʿArabī developed and employed with par-
ticular intensity. In this poem, the lover receives a message down through
a chain of transmitters who comprise personified states of consciousness
or emotion. Here, the lover sends a return message back in time, through
the transmitters, to the original speaker (a procedure that does not, of
course, occur in the formal hadith presenting the words or actions of the
prophet Muḥammad). In some cases, as with this poem, I have employed
italics to indicate the message or matn of the original speaker and, where
it seems appropriate, the return message of the lover.
    Verse 3, “brought us / the word”: the term here for bringing a word or
a report is muʿanʿan. That term could refer to a report that is passed on
from generation to generation through a chain of transmitters or to a tale


                                                      Notes to the Poems 255
as passed on by a tell-­all or gossip. Verse 5, “The one you seek / is within
your ribs, / turned in each breath / from side to side”: a subtext here is a
hadith stating that “the heart of the person of faith is between two fingers
of God.” On that hadith, see Morris, The Reflective Heart, 52, 65. In The
Meccan Openings, Ibn ʿArabī quotes another couplet on the same topic
(Fut., vol. 5, ch. 178, pp. 593–94).

Poem 15. This poem proceeds in a hyperbolic register. After a brief men-
tion of the beloved and her party leaving the poet, the verses barrel along
a track of expressive flashes. The poet evokes the erotically charged mem-
ory of the cheek of the beloved, gendered as male. He breaks into com-
plaint and calls for a friend to help him in his trials. He begs for a glimpse
of the beloved and receives a kind rejection. He casts another look back
to the beloved’s departure, then curses the cawing crows that portended
it and that are transformed in his mind into the camels that carried her
off. The poem concludes with the lover recalling and reliving a separation
that for him always has occurred and always is occurring.

Poem 16. This poem begins with a remembrance of the day of departure.
The poet then recalls or imagines the beloved journeying toward Yemen
and then, in a sudden switch, turning back toward Khawarnaq and Sadīr,
semilegendary palaces in the border regions between Arabia and Iraq that
were associated with the vanished grandeur of past civilizations. For
verses 5–6, I have employed the colloquial “damn it” for the Arabic
thubūran. The word might be more formally translated as “ruination,”
“destruction,” or “perish” (as in “perish the day”). Verse 6 is a direct para-
phrase of Q 25:14 concerning the final day of judgment. When wrongdo-
ers find themselves consigned to their place of punishment, they cry
thubūran and the divine voice answers, “Do not, today, cry out thubūran
just once; cry it over and over.”
    The tone shifts as the poet addresses a dove, moving into a deep lament
at the dove’s cry. In this he echoes the dove-­poet dynamic that opened
poem 11. When the poet complains that the dove’s cry has increased his
own sadness, we might ask if he is not also addressing himself, given that
he was the one who was crying out his anguish in the previous verses. The
dove in this poem and elsewhere in the Tarjumān appears as multivalent
and may also intimate an association with the beloved, as the poet imag-
ines his beloved weeping as he does. The lamentation culminates in the


256 Notes to the Poems
poet’s announcement that “death hovers in a dove’s cry” and his asking
for a brief remission, a request that recalls the plea for release in poem 2.
   The poem moves on to address the Eastwind, the star shepherd, and
the lightning gazer, three figures at the heart of the nasib tradition. The
star shepherd represents the desert poet who, beset by cares, passes a
sleepless night “grazing the stars,” that is, watching them as they move
across the night firmament until they slip over the horizon or fade into
the light of dawn—just as a herder watches his flock as it sets out to graze
by day and returns at dusk.
   For a classic exploration of this motif, see Stetkevych, Zephyrs of Najd,
chapter 4: “Meadows in the Sky,” 134–67. ʿAbd al-­ʿAziz Sayyid al-­Ahl of-
fers a brief discussion of several verses from poem 16; see Muḥyī al-­Dīn
Ibn ʿArabī: min shiʿrihi (Beirut: Dār al-­ʿIlm: 1970), 246–47.

Poem 17. Verse 6, “my liver’s caul”: Arabic poetry redounds with words
for “heart” but also mentions other organs of the body as seats of love and
passion, including the liver or, as in this case, the caul or membrane sur-
rounding the liver. Elsewhere in the Tarjumān, the liver can be associated
more explicitly with black bile and melancholy—not surprisingly, given
the influence of ancient Greek medical treatises on Arabic thought and
literature. (For “caul” as the membrane around the heart or liver, see the
King James translation of Hosea 13:8, “the caul of the heart,” and Exodus
29:13, “the caul that is above the liver.”)

Poem 18. This poem opens with the poet standing before the aṭlāl, asking
the ruins or area around them to speak. In this case, the poet seems to be
calling on others to question the now-­deserted meadows, though he may
in fact be calling on himself as well. In the nasib tradition the aṭlāl remain
mute before the poet’s questioning, yet a response (from somewhere,
perhaps from the poet himself ) is given. The poem proceeds in three
projective movements: the address to the meadows and the response that
the beloved’s party has gone off seeking al-­Udháyb; the delegation of the
Eastwind to serve as a scout and her subsequent report; and finally the
sending forth of companions to track down the beloved and her party.

Poem 19. This poem proceeds from aṭlāl lament to recollections of
the young women who will come to represent the beloved’s party. Wher-
ever they alight (or alighted, the remembered past and timeless present


                                                       Notes to the Poems 257
become indistinguishable), the drought-­stricken land burgeons with life,
and when they leave, it bears “the tombs of those who loved them.” Like
the spirit, which in Ibn ʿArabī’s mystical thought brings everything it
touches to life and flower, the beloved and her party revive the land when
they alight and leave it barren again when they depart. The ending re-
verses the tomb theme of poem 16. In poem 16, it was not the lovers who
are confined to tombs in the wake of the beloved’s departure but those
who failed to love in the first place.

Poem 20. This poem includes the most sustained allusions to the Niẓām
figure within the Tarjumān. The poet begins in a frenetic mode (verses
1–5), with each verse taking up one motif that recurs, often in expanded
form, elsewhere in the Tarjumān. These motifs include lovesickness, for
which the only cure is the name of the beloved who caused the ailment;
the mournful cry of the dove; the lover’s exclamations over a girl’s beauty
and charms; the figuring of the beloved in terms of rising and setting
heavenly bodies (in this case the sun); and the poet’s address to the aṭlāl
and his recollection of beauties that once filled the place.
    The movement from motif to motif slows somewhat at verses 7–8 with
the image of the gazelle and the fire within the poet’s breast, then comes
to a halt in verses 9–15. In these verses, the poet calls on his companions
to help him grieve at the ruins of the beloved’s campsite, although he
acknowledges that ultimately he must face his loss alone. He perseverates
at this point, repeating his pleas to the companions as if he were frozen in
place before the aṭlāl. The reanimation of the poet occurs as he urges his
companions to console him with names of various beloveds, tales of inti-
mate goings-­on at the stations of Ḥājir and Zarūd, and verses recounting
the fate of star-­crossed lovers such as Bishr and Hind, Qays and Laylā, and
Ghaylān and Mayya. As he recites the names of these muses, poet-­lovers,
and sites of love from a now-­mythic past, he begins to revive.
    With verse 17, the poem shifts to the Niẓām figure and into a new
lyrical register. The poet longs for a girl who is a master of the rhetorical
arts (“for a young girl, / harmony in verse, / in prose, in oration!”), more
fully, “a young girl who is master of prose, poetry, pulpit, and elucida-
tion”: dhāti nathrin wa niẓāmin wa minbarin [pulpit] wa bayyāni). The
word for poetry (niẓām) offers yet another instance in which Niẓām is
embedded within the poetry rather than named by the poet as a beloved.
In his Niẓām preface, Ibn ʿArabī had extolled her as a girl (ṭafla, the same


258 Notes to the Poems
word used in this poem) who not only embodied beauty in all its forms
but also mastered all forms of verbal eloquence, had called her a master
(shaykha), and suggested that she might have been his own master.
    That the verse alludes to the Niẓām figure mentioned in the preface is
confirmed in the following verse, which extols the beloved as a daughter
of Persian kings and of Iṣfahān—the city of Niẓām’s father and aunt. The
unnamed, obliquely referenced beloved is then associated with Iraq, an
association that resonates with other poems in the Tarjumān expressing
longing for a beloved in Baghdad or places near to it. The conjuration of
Niẓām brings into play the East/West polarity of Arabia-­Persia and, with
a slight tilt, Yemen-­Iraq. (At the time, the designation Iraq referred pri-
marily to the region of Baghdad rather than any particular polity.) The
poet uses a courteous address appropriate for formal circles (“my lords”
or “gentlemen”) to challenge the logic that contradictions can never meet.
He then announces a mystical communion in which he and the beloved
share wine without having to pass the cup back and forth and share a song
of rapture without sound (verses 21–22).
    In this poem, the precise alignment of the opposites that by logic can-
not meet shifts from verse to verse. In the final verse, the poet rebukes an
unnamed poet for claiming that Suhayl and the Pleiades, two signal points
of the night sky, could never come together, given that one rises toward
Syria while the other is setting over Yemen. (The verses in question are
ascribed to ʿUmar ibn ʿabī al-­Rabīʿa [Dīwān, 438].)

Poem 21. In verse 1, the poet urges the wadi to respond to “the lady / of
this hallowed ground”: rabba al-­ḥimā. Rabba is the feminine of rabb,
“lord,” the plural of which, arbāb, appeared in the concluding verse of
poem 1: “The lords of love.” Al-­ḥimā, translated here as hallowed ground,
can be interpreted as a common noun, as in this translation, or as a place-­
name. In pre-­Islamic poetry, the word referred to a tribe’s sacred pasture
grounds. Its sacral character shows forth clearly in poetry and lore: if
someone from a rival tribe transgressed upon a ḥimā, it was a cause
for war.
   In the nasib, the ḥimā epitomizes a site of beauty and bounty, and the
abode of the beloved. The poet urges the wadi garden to provide shade
for the “lady of the ḥimā” until her assembly, which includes desert travel-
ers setting up their tents by the wadi, can gather around her. That as­
sembly appears as pastoral counterpart to the audience that might have


                                                     Notes to the Poems 259
assembled around a diva in Baghdad. It also foreshadows the gathering
(nādī) assembled around its mistress or lady (rabba) in poem 61. Only
when the lady of the ḥimā is fully accommodated and her assembly has
gathered around her will it attain the shade, dew, and rain that it needs.
Here as elsewhere in the Tarjumān, the verdant meadow or garden is tied
intrinsically to the presence of the beloved.

Poem 22. This exquisite lyric exemplifies the sensuous visionary imagery
of the Tarjumān. The imagery of verse 6 echoes within and beyond the
Tarjumān’s interior frame. The first part of the verse, “she extends you a
hand / soft as undyed silk,” may recall the opening of the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn
preface: as Ibn ʿArabī finished reciting the four verses that had come to
his mind near the Kaʿba, he felt a jolt between his shoulders “from a hand
softer than undyed silk.”

Poem 23. This poem consists of a slow ascent (verses 1–5) followed by a
rapidly accelerating movement that concludes with the poet’s self-­portrait
in a time out of time. It opens with a group of riders posed at dawn after a
long night journey. They gaze at something appearing in the early dawn
light. The scene and the specific word for “appear” (lāḥa) indicate an ap-
parition as much as an appearance. The vision occurs at the liminal mo-
ment when an object first emerges into visibility, prompting the observer
to wonder whether he really sees something or not, whether what he sees
is real or imaginary, and what it in fact truly is. The features of what is seen
gradually emerge into clarity as a prominent object on a mountain peak,
and then into further definition as a monumental structure like the fabled
castle of ʿAqūq. The poetic lens then moves in to a close-­up of the inscrip-
tion carved, like an ancient graffito perhaps, into the structure’s brick or
rock walls. As the tale carved there unfolds, the poetic pace accelerates,
propelled by parallel constructions, the poem’s anapestic mutaqārib meter,
and increased alignment between metrical feet and syntactical units.

Poem 24. With this poem, Ibn ʿArabī plumbs a particularly deep vein of
nasib sensibility. The poem proceeds at a steady, solemn pace into and
through a passage of grief. It begins with the lover asking an unnamed
addressee to stay and grieve by the ruins at the station of Laʿlaʿ. By leaving
the addressee unnamed, he evokes the possibility that he may be address-



260 Notes to the Poems
ing himself. Verse 2 continues the address but ends by suggesting the poet
has indeed been addressing himself. In verse 3, the poet grieves for the
times spent near “her moringa,” thereby tying together the ruins, the mo-
ringa, the station of Laʿlaʿ, and the beloved. There follows the dervish’s
verse that inspired the poem as the poet complains that the lightning (a
sign of rain for the desert traveler and, in the lightning of the beloved’s
smile, a sign of promised intimacy) has been unfaithful only to him. The
station of Laʿlaʿ, the ruins, the moringa, the lightning, and the formerly
“luxuriant land” seem to respond as one with the beloved:
   We used, she said,
   to come there together
   in my branches’ shadows
   in that lush land
   My lightning, once
   a smile’s flash,
   is now a blaze
   of barren stone
In verse 8, the poet shifts to speaking in the third person about his
interlocutor:
   I forgave her
   as I heard her speak,
   grieving as I grieved
   with wounded heart
Over the final three verses, the dialogue shifts as the poet asks the deserted
meadow where the beloved and her party might be. The meadow no lon-
ger responds as one with the grieving beloved but instead informs the
poet of the beloved’s itinerary.

Poem 25. This poem takes up the most informal of all classical meters,
rajaz. The first part of the poem consists of exclamations, chains of images,
and rapid shifts in address. In verses 4–6, the beloved is gendered as male,
then suddenly, in verse 7, as female.
   Verses 11–13 praise the beloved with parallel evocations of Qur’anic
themes. Verse 11, “Had Iblīs seen . . . he’d have fallen down in prayer”: the



                                                       Notes to the Poems 261
Qur’an relates that when the creator announced his intention to create
the human being, Adam, who would serve as his regent (khalīfa) on earth,
the angels protested, asking why he would create one who will “spill blood
and corrupt the world.” Adam is shown to know something, “the names,”
that the angels do not. The angels take the position of ritual prayer (sujūd)
before Adam. When Iblīs refuses, he is cast from the heavens (Q 2:30–34;
15:28–31; 32:7–9; 38:71–75). In this poem, the beloved outshines Adam:
a glimpse of her beauty would have compelled even the proud Iblīs to fall
into sujūd. Verse 12 evokes the Idrīs–Enoch–Hermes figure, the legendary
inventor of writing. Verse 13 returns to the Qur’anic story of Bilqīs and
Sulaymān that formed the poetic frame for poem 2.

Poem 26. Like poem 14, this poem enmeshes itself within the language
of hadith transmission and images of the lost, verdant meadows of the
nasib. “The Garden of Eden”: literally “The Garden of Safe Abode” (jannat
al-­maʾwā) beheld in Muḥammad’s prophetic vision (Q 53:15). In the ha-
dith and prophetic biographies, Muḥammad encounters jannat al-­maʾwā
near the culmination of his heavenly ascent. Jannat al-­maʾwā could be
viewed as the garden of the future paradise as well as a retrieval of the
Garden of Eden. Arabic poets had long boasted of the ancient vintage of
their wine: a vintage of ancient Persia or of Enoch, Noah, or Adam, or
even, as in the opening verse from Ibn al-­Fāriḍ’s famous wine ode, a vin-
tage of a time that preceded the creation of the grapevine. For the associa-
tion of wine with musk, see the Qur’anic reference to the wine of paradise
(Q 83:26) as “wine sealed with musk.”

Poem 27. The poem begins with the expression “old house” (al-­bayt al-­
ʿatīq), which can serve as an epithet for the Kaʿba. The poet’s reference to
it as “high above” may reflect the manner in which the Kaʿba temple looms
over the pilgrims. Yet the verse may also allude to the Qur’anic “Fre-
quented House” (al-­bayt al-­maʿmūr, Q 52:7), the celestial counterpart to
the Kaʿba, around which a different set of seventy thousand angels per-
form ritual prayers each day according to hadith in the highly regarded
compilations of al-­Bukhārī and Muslim bin al-­Ḥajjāj.
    Sessions of the Righteous (MAb 1:290) introduces this poem with these
words: “I was circling the Kaʿba one night when I was overcome with a
particularly sweet feeling. And I said, complaining of the thirst I suffered
during my desert journey, ‘Old house high above . . .’”


262 Notes to the Poems
Poem 28. This poem takes the short, dimeter form of the informal rajaz
meter. Due to the short verse length, I have translated it into couplets,
with some minor adjustments, starting at verse 15, to fit the English ca-
dence. The verse number indications (15, 20) reflect the verse numbering
in the Arabic text.

Poem 29. This poem begins with a sixteen-­verse reverie, a dance of erotic
images, and the vision of an endless cascade of acceptance, with the
Qur’anic visions of huris as a subtext. At its midpoint (verse 16), the mood
turns as the poet plunges into a short version of the classical ode’s harrow-
ing journey-­quest (raḥīl). The poem culminates with an eerie set of verses
in which a fearsomely attractive figure, gendered masculine, appears as a
moon during the ritual circling associated with Kaʿba, which we’ve en-
countered in poems 3, 7, and 12. In poem 29, the Kaʿba is not mentioned
and the circling is performed as the poet and the moon figure circle each
other, with the former continually effacing his footprints with the train of
his robe. Such circling resonates strongly with the first chapter of Meccan
Openings in which Ibn ʿArabī encounters a mystical youth who is at once
a manifestation of the Holy Spirit, a personification of the Kaʿba, and the
agent of mystical initiation. The scene also resonates with one of the core
rituals of Sufism, when a group chants a dhikr (repeated mantra-­like
words or short phrases from the Qur’an or other revered sources) while
moving in a circular motion. In some sessions, two individuals from the
circling group come to the center, lock hands together, and spin in the
opposite direction of the circling group. The faces of the two spinning in
the center stand out to each other with clarity as the chanting devotees
appear as a blurry whirl. Verse 21, “I folded toward him / in desire and
fear” ( fa-­ṭawwaytu min ḥadharin ʿalayhi sharāsifan): the eeriness of the
final verses is intensified by the use of an Arabic word (shursūf, pl. sharāsif)
that can mean either “rib cage” (as in I bowed from below the rib rage or
I held him to my rib cage) or “ill-­luck” and that, with a single shift of vo-
calization (shursūf, pl. sharāsif), would mean “shroud.” Verse 22 begins
with “he [a full moon] appeared in the circling”: qamarun taʿarḍa fī-­ṭ-­
ṭawāf. The same words appear in the second verse of a poem by Ibn ʿArabī
included in Sessions of the Righteous (MAb 1:411–14).

Poem 30. In this, the longest poem of the Tarjumān, the poetic voice
wanders through various modalities and moods of ghazal verse. The poem


                                                        Notes to the Poems 263
also features a number of Qur’anic allusions. The first occurs in verse 8
with “Sabā’s [Sheba’s] lost tribes” (Q 34:15–31). Some have suggested that
Sūra 34 reflects a Yemen or land of Sabā in decline, presumably well after
the time of Bilqīs, perhaps after the collapse of the great Maʾrib dam, the
ruins of which are visible today. “Sabā’s lost tribes”: aydī sabā, literally
“the hands of Sabā,” a metaphor that could mean “the power of Sabā” or
“the forces of Sabā.” In verses 10–14, the poet laments his loss and asks
each of the winds in turn to report a hadith that will speak to his condition.
Verses 19–21 move through differing perspectives of nature/human em-
pathy and mutual mirroring. The natural (evening clouds, sunset glow,
rain, narcissi, and roses) and the human (tears, cheeks) are intertwined.
The nature-­human convergence here resonates strongly with the endings
of poem 12 and poem 28.
    After an interlude of ghazal flirtation that reaches a point of poetic
self-­parody, the poet presents himself through two Qur’anic characters.
The first is the mysterious al-­Sāmirī (verse 32), who appears in the
Qur’anic story of Mūsā, the Israelites, and the golden calf (Q 20:85–97).
When Mūsā comes down from the mountain and confronts his people
worshiping the calf, they excuse themselves by pointing to al-­Sāmirī as
the responsible party. After they melted down the jewelry that they had
taken from Egypt and molded it into the shape of a calf, al-­Sāmirī sprin-
kled it with dust taken from the footprint of “the messenger” (rasūl), caus-
ing it to low. That messenger is usually taken to be the spirit (rūḥ) or Jibrīl.
Ibn ʿArabī associates the messenger in this story with the spirit as a life
force. A core theme throughout his writings holds that wherever the spirit
passes, life surges.
    Another Qur’anic character is evoked in verses 33–34, where the poet
declares that he will pursue the beloved’s party, no matter where they
travel, like Dhū al-­Qarnayn (“the two-­horned”). In Q 18:83–98, Dhū al-­
Qarnayn is depicted traveling to the eastern and western ends of the earth
along heavenly “cords” (asbāb). In Islamic lore, Dhū al-­Qarnayn was as-
sociated with Iskandar (Alexander the Great), the name I have employed
in the translation.
    On the Qur’anic portrayal of Dhū al-­Qarnayn, see Kevin van Bladel,
“Heavenly Cords and Prophetic Authority in the Quran and Its Late An-
tique Context,” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 70,
no. 2 (2007): 223–46; and idem, “The Alexander Legend in the Qur’an,”
in The Qur’an in Its Historical Context, edited by Gabriel Said Reynolds


264 Notes to the Poems
(London: Routledge, 2008), 83–102. For a brilliant exploration of the “the
trace” or “footprint” in the Moses/Mūsa accounts in rabbinic literature
and Islamic traditions, see David Halperin, Faces of the Chariot (Tübingen:
J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], 1988): 14–190, 476–83.

Poem 31. This elegant ghazal recalls poem 22 in register and pace but in
longer, more sustained form.

Poems 32–38. An interior suite of short poems. In poem 32, the poet
hearkens back to the times of his youth when he traveled from Najd to
Tihām and lit a campfire for his beloved. The lover’s memories are sparked
by words heard between Karkh (the western part of Baghdad) and
Ḥadītha, which lies on the Euphrates some 150 miles northwest of Bagh-
dad. “Fifty years”: commentators have pointed out that Ibn ʿArabī would
have been about fifty years old at the time he composed the Tarjumān. In
the context of the Niẓām romance, Karkh, like Ḥalba and Dār al-­Falak, is
associated by some readers with the residence of Niẓām. In verse 4, the
poet recalls building a fire from “flametree and markh”—two desert
plants, ʿafār and markh, valued as kindling. Poem 33. The entire poem is
devoted to the dove-­poet colloquy, with its own distinctive emphasis and
tone. Poem 34. This short, apparently simple poem features reverberating
patterns, etymological excavations, puns, and elaborate alliterations. The
sophisticated employment of jinās results in a light touch of wit and a
pictorial impression of poignant simplicity. Poem 35. Tanʿīm is a site out-
side of Mecca. Women pilgrims who were menstruating would wait there
until their menses had passed before proceeding to the Kaʿba and per-
forming the hajj. “I’m here for you now” (labbayka) is the ritual phrase
pronounced by pilgrims at various points during the hajj.

Poem 36. Verse 4, “Flashed over Híma”: there is a particularly intriguing
text puzzle regarding this verse. The manuscripts consulted for this book
(described in appendix 1) read al-­ḥimā, as do Diwān al-­Maʿārif and Ses-
sions of the Righteous (MAb 2:261), yet the manuscripts and printed edi-
tions of Priceless Treasures read al-­ghaḍā, which is the word Ibn ʿArabī
proceeds to interpret in his commentary.
   In Sessions of the Righteous, the poem is followed by the same com-
mentary found in Priceless Treasures: this is the only instance of Ibn ʿArabī
providing a commentary on a poem in Sessions identical to that found in


                                                      Notes to the Poems 265
Precious Treasures. In Sessions, the poem is introduced by “Among my
poems on the laṭāʾif al-­ʿirfāniyya fī al-­ishārāt (mystic subtleties within the
allusions) is the following . . .”
   This poem extends the themes of poem 32 and the poet’s reflection on
his fifty years. It concludes with a play on the first verse of a poem by Ibn
Dumayna (d. ca. 800). Ibn ʿArabī included Ibn Dumayna’s entire six-­verse
poem along with his own commentary on it in Sessions of the Righteous,
where he followed it with Ibn Sīna’s famous “fall of the soul” poem, before
proceeding to present a group of ten Tarjumān poems. Sessions of the
Righteous (MAb 1:286–93) thereby provides a window onto poetic inter-
textuality in thirteenth-­century Arabic poetry and into Ibn ʿArabī’s own
poetic sensibility.

Poem 37. This poem distills a recurring theme of the Tarjumān, that of
the lover’s message, into five exquisitely wrought verses. The poet com-
missions his companion-­messengers to travel through the Arabian imagi-
nary’s archetypal sites (verses 1–3) in order to proclaim his devastated
condition and make inquiries on his behalf (verses 4–5). The messenger’s
trajectory begins near al-­Ḥimā (“Preserve,” “Sanctuary”), hearkening
back to the vernal tribal grounds of the pre-­Islamic poets. The first goal is
the highland plateau of Najd that for the poets is the land of fragrant east
winds, fresh springs, the fellowship of lovers and seekers, and intimations
of the beloved’s presence. In Najd, the poet adds, the messengers will
encounter a solitary waymark, literally “that waymark” (dhāka al-­ʿalam),
an expression in which the demonstrative adjective “that” connotes
uniqueness or special significance. For the poets, an ʿalam could refer to
a mound of stones or cairn set up along a desert route, a natural feature
such as a mountain peak, a ruined fortress, or other another constructed
or natural feature that served to guide the traveler in the unforgiving vast-
ness of the desert. The word evokes the desert topography and those who
venture through it but, as noted in reference to poem 23, can elicit deeper
questions regarding perception and knowledge, appearance and reality;
issues that, for the traveler attempting to find the path through the desert
maze, constitute a matter of life and death.
   In this poem, that certain special waymark is the one that would guide
the messengers toward a place and time of proximity to the beloved and
her party. On that path they will pass by Twisting Sands (al-­liwā), a fea-
ture or site that took a prominent place in the nasib from the time of the


266 Notes to the Poems
pre-­Islamic poet Imru’ al-­Qays, who associated it with the place where
(or near to where) the beloved set off on her journey away from the lover.
After Twisting Sands comes the shade of the lote (al-­ḍāl), the tree that
could mark the locus amoenis of the lover’s union with the beloved in that
primordial time before the separation, and Salam (also known as Dhū
al-­Salam, “the place of salam trees”), yet another station in the travels of
the beloved.
    Then, finally, comes the traveler’s goal: Minā, site of the most intense
rites of the hajj pilgrimage, including the great sacrifice that marks the
holiest day of the Muslim calendar—the place that holds the poet’s heart.
Minā is at the heart of a vast concourse of pilgrims. There the messengers
are to listen to the reports brought by travelers from near and far, to pass
on to them news of the lover’s condition, and, most importantly, to in-
quire. The poet uses an emphatic sequence of three verbs to indicate the
act of inquiry and does so in a manner that leaves the proposed inquiry
both open-­ended and urgent, rendered here at “why . . . why?” (One
might also interpret the questions as “how, where, why?”) In the nasib
context, that question may be posed to the companions of the beloved,
to the sweet fragrances, lightning flashes, Eastwind, or to the ruins of the
beloved’s campsite, the aṭlāl, that since pre-­Islamic times have answered
the poet’s question with silence.

Poem 38. This poem starts out as an homage to Baghdad as the home of
both the poet’s imam and of a beautiful Persian girl. Verse 4 is built upon
the wordplay between two radicals. The first, ḥ/y/y, forms the basis for
words such as “life,” “greet,” and “tribe,” all three of which are semanti-
cally interrelated: to greet someone is to wish that person long or healthy
life, and a tribe—or, in later usage, neighborhood—is the locus of life. The
first hemistich of the verse, translated literally, reads: “She greets and
thereby brings back to life the one she slew with her gaze.” The second
hemistich of the fourth Arabic verse (the final quatrain in the English) is
built upon three different forms of the radical ḥ/s/n: ḥusn (beauty); ḥusnā
(an action carried out in a generous way or one that turns out happily or
“for the best” or simply a happy outcome); and iḥsān, a word with a par-
ticularly deep ethical and religious valence. Arabic commentators and
lexicographers viewed iḥsān as an extension of the beautiful into the realm
of the ethical and social spheres. A famous hadith characterizes iḥsān as:
“to worship God as though you see him, and even if you cannot see him,


                                                      Notes to the Poems 267
know that he sees you.” More widely, the virtue of iḥsān can entail making
every act, however humble, an act of worship.

Poem 39. This poem opens with huri-­like figures teasing the poet at
the Kaʿba, an echo of poem 7. It then unfolds as an extended elabora-
tion of the light/night and sun/moon binary that recurs throughout
the Tarjumān, often breaking into longer poems in the form of one to
three verse segments. The poem unfolds as a dance of images, each of
which extends the core light/night contrast into a new set of opposi-
tions and reconciliations, particularly through the contrast between
the splendor of the beloved’s unveiled countenance and the sheltering
dark of her hair.

Poem 40. This homage to a girl is also a meditation on time and place. The
girl is said to be fourteen years old. She appears as the full moon, which
occurs on the fourteenth day of the month according to the Islamic lunar
calendar. Yet this moon-­girl does not undergo growth or decline, the twin
aspects of the “natural” moon as it moves through time. The phases of the
moon take on particular importance during the month of Ramadan,
which begins with the spotting of the new moon. The month falls into two
fourteen-­day segments, the first in which the moon waxes, and the second
in which it wanes. By stating that the moon-­girl in question neither moves
through constellations nor goes through phases, the poet places her be-
yond the natural cycles of time and place. Thus, she “knows no doubling,
odd to even” ( fa mā tushaffiʿu l-­witra) but remains singular. It is timelessly
“full.” To double the odd (oneness) to the even (twoness) would be to fall
into the world of time. For a Qur’anic subtext, see Q 36:40: “And the
moon—we have determined mansions for it through which it [travels] and
returns, the night does not outstrip the day, and each [of the heavenly
bodies] is gliding along in its own sphere.” See also Q 89:1–6, where the
divine voice swears by essential polarities and patterns of the cosmos: “By
the dawn / By the nights ten / By the odd and the even / By the night as
it eases away / Is there not in that an oath for the thoughtful mind?”
(Qur’anic exegetes have interpreted the ten nights as the ten nights of the
hajj.) The girl-­moon thereby transcends the polarities and patterns within
the created world and within the act of creation.
    Ibn ʿArabī also notes in his commentary that fourteen is considered a
perfect number in that it combines the perfect number four with ten


268 Notes to the Poems
(1+2+3+4). See also Meccan Openings (Fut., vol. 2, ch. 69, pp. 416–17),
especially the opening of the eleventh verse of the poem presented there.

Poem 41. In this poem, the call of a bird in a moringa tree (which in this
case could be either the mournful coo of a dove or the ominous caw of a
crow) incites the lover’s journey that will take up the rest of the poem.
The poem is composed in the anapestic mutaqārib meter, with uniform
feet of three syllables patterned as ˘ ˘ ¯ or ˘ ¯ ¯ . That meter contributes to
the poem’s galloping forward momentum, a momentum that is further
enhanced by the manner in which the two halves of each verse create a
syntactical call-­and-­response effect, especially in poem’s middle section.
I have adjusted the default uppercase protocol for the beginning of stanzas
to reflect the way the poetic voice in this poem charges across the verses.
Like poem 12, this poem concludes with a declaration regarding the
nature-­human symbiosis: the softness of a lover’s cheek is not like the
softness of a fresh bough, but vice versa. The attributes of nature are pat-
terned on the human: “Blush red’s the garden rose.”

Poem 42. Here the poetic voice approaches full delirium. The first three
verses are based upon intense employment of jinās. Verse 1 juxtaposes
mahāt (doe oryx) with mahā (onyx or sunstone), echoing earlier Tarjumān
representations of the gazelle and oryx as luminous beings analogous to
the sun. The second verse entwines itself around the Arabic radical s/h/ā,
which yields suhā, the faint star that was considered to be most difficult
to spot and became a test case for stargazers, as well as the verb sahā, “to
neglect” or “fail to perceive.” The third verse culminates with the theme
of the sacrificial offering, with complex jinās play on the letters s/r/b and
l/h/ā:
   sir bihī             sirbihī
                     bi-­                    sirbihī
                                          li-­
   lead him away     with his heart       for (taking the place of ) his herd
   fa-­l-­luhā       taftaḥu bi l-­ḥamdi l-­lahā
   for oblations     open	with praise the throats (open
                                throats in praise)
   The final two verses tie together love-­madness, hadith traditions re-
garding allowable forms of exchange, and the power of invocation. They
do so with a play on the Arabic syllable “hā,” which serves as an end rhyme


                                                        Notes to the Poems 269
throughout the poem. Yet the penultimate verse begins with the poet
stating that this poem has no proper end-­rhyme construction. The poet
declares that his only aim (qaṣḍ, the word from which the word for the
classical ode, qaṣīda, is derived) is the letter or syllable hā, which can
feature as part of a word or as an independent pronoun. His claim is
partially unpacked in the next verse, which begins, literally translated,
“my goal is the expression ‘her’ (hā) for the sake of ‘her.’” The full im-
plication of this appeal unfolds in the final hemistich, which would read,
word for word, “the only trade or exchange I love is hā wa hā (“her and
her,” “it and it,” or “this and this”). In his note to this poem, Nicholson
suspected that hā wa hā was “a formula used in completing a bargain.”
Here the expression may reflect a principle in Islamic rulings on trade.
Indeed, hadiths outlining what commodity trades were permissible em-
ploy a nearly identical expression. The trade in certain commodities,
such as gold, silver, wheat, and barley, was subject to stringent rules. It
was licit to trade gold bullion for gold jewelry, for example, but not
for silver jewelry. Gold could only be traded in the form of hāʾ wa hāʾ:
“this item for that item of the same species, immediately and without
delay.” (For one party to delay handing over an item would raise the
question of usury in Islamic legal considerations.) The letter hamza in
hā’ would have been dropped in the poem in accord with the rules of
poetic license.
     The poet addresses the beloved saying, “you so full with / beauty—I’ve
nothing.” He has nothing to give. She needs nothing. He then declares his
solution: he will trade “her” for “her.” In the jurisprudence of the religion
of love, the poet’s permissible terms of exchange (gold for gold, etc.) align
with the magic of invocation: by calling “her,” he brings her into his
presence.
     For the relevant hadith traditions, see Volkan Yildiran Stodolsky, A
New Historical Model and Periodization for the Perception of the Sunnah of
the Prophet and His Companions, PhD diss., University of Chicago, 2012,
109–17, 235. On the question of proper rhyme (qāfiya) in regard to this
poem, Ibn ʿArabī states in his commentary that some grammarians con-
sider the kind of end rhyme employed in this poem as lacking the proper
preceding syllable but that others take a different position. See Priceless
Treasures: Dīwān Dhakhāʾir al-­Aʿlāq [sic], edited by Muḥammad ʿAlam
al-­Dīn al-­Shuqayrī (al-­Haram [Egypt]: al-­ʿAyn lil-­Dirāsāt wa-­al-­Buḥūth
al-­Insāniyya wa-­al-­Ijtimāʿiyya, 1995), 454.


270 Notes to the Poems
Poem 43. This poem begins with the poet’s plea to the camel drivers who
are leading the beloved and her party away. It proceeds through a haze of
memories concerning the day of separation, recalled or imagined trajec-
tories of the beloved, and the lover’s complaint at being abandoned and
neglected. “Splitting bittergourd” in verse 6 recalls the muʿallaqa (Hang-
ing Ode) of the pre-­Islamic poet Imru’ al-­Qays, in which the lover de-
scribes his shock and pain at the lover’s departure with the same words—a
phrase interpreted by commentators as evoking burning eyes and tears.
Bittergourd or bitter apple (ḥanẓal) is the fruit of an earth-­hugging vine
known for its astringency. The poem concludes with two verses on pa-
tience, echoing the final verse of poem 5.

Poem 44. Divine ineffability plays a central role in Islamic theology and
within Sufi thought particularly. The divine reality, being infinite, cannot
be described in human language, although the names and attributes given
to it in the Qur’an, viewed as the word of God, are affirmed. This poem
centers on the ineffability of the beloved, who eludes the grasp of those
who would delimit her or tie her down.
   Verse 10: the manuscripts indicate considerable confusion over two
words in this verse, which are based on the radical r/w/ḥ (which yields
meanings of spirit, wind, and refreshment) and n/q/l (which yields mean-
ings of move, transport, transmit, and translate).

Poem 45. While poem 44 evoked the ineffability of the beloved, poem 45
evokes the infinity of shawq. The lover longs to be with the beloved, but,
when with her, his fear of separation comes between them. In other
poems, the infinity of shawq reflects the motif that at the point of union
with the beloved, the lover has lost all consciousness of self. When self-­
consciousness returns with the lover realizing he is one with the beloved,
he falls back into separation. Ibn ʿArabī addresses this aspect of the lover’s
dilemma in the chapter on love theory in the Meccan Openings (Fut. 5:
593–94; Gloton, Traité d’Amour, 57–58). In the classical ghazal tradition,
the union of lover and beloved is, by definition, ephemeral at best. In the
thought of Ibn ʿArabī (as noted in reference poem 11), the mystic is ever
perishing out of love for the divine beloved, becoming one with the be-
loved, then thrown back into separation at the beloved’s appearance in a
new form, and then joyfully reuniting with the beloved in that new mani-
festation. This poem, composed in the rollicking rajaz meter and with


                                                      Notes to the Poems 271
numerous puns and interior rhymes, provides a change of pace and tone
at this point in the Tarjumān.

Poem 46. A dialogue between the poet and the Eastwind serves as the
emotive heart of this poem. I have used italics to clarify the dialogue
without resorting to quotation marks, which in Arabic love poetry—as
in the hadith and the Qur’an—can result in embedded chains of double
quotes and single quotes: “I asked the Eastwind about them / And who
are you to want / to know? she answered / At Twin Flash I left / the pil-
grims, and at the relays of Ghimād and Ghamīm, close by / It’s said no land
can hold them / But they will never elude / the cavalries of my long-
ing . . .” Here and in other cases, however, the exact moment when the
speech of one party ends and the other begins can be open to more than
one interpretation.

Poem 47. This short poem begins with the poet-­dove scene encountered
in earlier poems. In this case, a Qur’anic passage serves as the subtext for
the complaint. The divine speaker states (Q 33:72), “We offered the trust
(al-­amāna) to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they each
shrank from it in fear. The human being accepted it, but proved to be
unjust and foolhardy.” In the poem, love is in effect the trust that the world
could not bear to accept. In his commentary on this poem, Ibn ʿArabī
quotes the twelfth-­century garland poet of Seville, al-­Aʿmā al-­Tuṭīlī: “His
laugh flashed pearl. The full moon shone as he removed his veil. / Time
could not hold him, but my heart took him in” (ḍāḥikun ʿan juman /
sāfirun ʿan badrī / ḍāqa ʿanhu z-­zamān / wa ḥawāhu ṣadrī). A subtext for
Ibn ʿArabī’s commentary is a hadīth qudsī (divine saying): “My heaven
and earth could not hold me, but the heart of my believing servant does.”
On this hadith in the work of Ibn ʿArabī, see William Chittick, The Sufi
Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-­ʿArabī’s Metaphysics of Imagination (Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1989), 107. See also Hermann, vol. 2,
pp. 258–59; and A. R. Nykl, Hispano-­Arabic Poetry, and Its Relations with
the Old Provençal Troubadours (Baltimore: J. H. Furst, 1946). For the Ara-
bic text of the Tuṭīlī’s twenty-­one-­verse muwashshaḥa along with a trans-
lation, see James T. Monroe, Hispano-­Arabic Poetry: A Student Anthology
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974), 252–55. For the theme
of accepting the trust that the cosmos itself has refused, see also Hafiz’s



272 Notes to the Poems
“The sky couldn’t bear the burden of His trust, so they cast lots and drew
the name of crazy me,” translated by Elizabeth Gray, The Green Sea of
Heaven: Fifty Ghazals from the Diwan of Hafiz, ghazal 29, verse 3, pp.
98–99.
   The final two verses of the poem return to the imagery of circling
(ṭawāf), echoing the mutual-­circling verses in poem 29.

Poems 48–50. Here we encounter another suite of short poems. Poem
48, a work of consummate lyricism, needs no commentary. Poem 49
opens with three verses oscillating between the lover’s complaints about
and praise of the beloved. In verse 4, the body of the poet becomes the
aṭlāl or ruins in which there is a garden, a garden that elsewhere in the
Tarjumān springs into blossom when the beloved and her party are pres-
ent. This garden, however, is the haunt of a dove and of the lover, each
mourning their own loss. The dove motif recalls similar passages in poems
11, 13, 16, 20, 33, and 47, and anticipates those in 56 and 61, although each
of those passages takes on a distinctive inner dynamic and specific place-
ment within each poem in which it appears. The final verse, in which the
poet complains of a beloved who seems to take pleasure in his torment,
returns the poem to the ghazal discourse with which it began. Poem 50
recalls the pre-­Islamic nasib motif of the phantom (ṭayf or khayāl) of the
beloved, which makes a night visitation to the lover. For a translation and
study of a pre-­Islamic ode centered on the phantom theme, see John Sey-
bold, “The Earliest Demon Lover: The Ṭayf al-­Khayāl in al-­Mufaḍḍaliyāt,”
in Suzanne Pinckney Stetkevych, ed., Reorientations: Arabic and Persian
Poetry (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994): 180–89.

Poem 51. This short poem opens with a reference to a nightwalker (ṭāriq),
a word with baleful associations in Arabic poetry. As the poem continues,
it becomes clear that it is the lover who is walking through the night. There
follows a procession of place-­names deeply resonant within the Arabic
poetic tradition. As elsewhere, I have used both transliteration and trans-
lations to weave such names into the acoustics of the English text and to
hint at some of their associations. In the poem’s final verse, the poet de-
clares a kingdom for the beloved and a kingdom for the lover, a declara-
tion that, in poems to follow, will be complicated by more tangled reflec-
tions on mastery and subjection in love.



                                                      Notes to the Poems 273
Poem 52. This poem embodies a phenomenon central to the classical
Arabic nasib: the lover laments his distance from the beloved yet “recalls”
her journey away from him even though he could not have witnessed it.
Alternatively, he presents himself as speaking during the departure, pre-
dicting the trajectory she would follow after her departure. Here, as in
verses 3–4 of poem 19, Ibn ʿArabī radicalizes the phenomenon to the
point of schizophrenia. The poet presents one part of himself as standing
with his companions at the site of departure or at one of the beloved’s
abandoned stations, and depicts the other part as clinging to, trailing, and
haunting the beloved’s party at every stage of their journey, “howling on
their trail.”

Poem 53. Visual and acoustic metaphors combine in this three-­verse
poem. The doubled letter is a core element of Arabic phonology and or-
thography. In Arabic, consonant doubling is a fundamental phonemic
marker. To ignore it is to babble incomprehensibly. Printed copies of the
Qur’an always include a small mark (tashdīd) above the consonant in
question, and copyists or editors sometimes added the tashdīd to poetic
texts. The conceit underlying this poem is based on the default writing
system, in which the doubled letter remains unmarked. Arabic readers
are expected to know when to read a single consonant and when to read
it as doubled. In the latter case, the letter is pronounced as doubled as if
two identical letters had been merged into a single sign. The letter is in
this sense “heard but unseen.”
    With “I’m shadow, and he is light,” the poem moves to a more cross-­
linguistic, two-­in-­one image. For the motif of the largely invisible yet au-
dible lover in a poem by the Andalusian lyric master Ibn Zaydūn (d. 1070),
see Michael Sells, “Love,” in María Rosa Menocal, Raymond P. Scheind-
lin, and Michael A. Sells, eds., Cambridge History of Arabic Literature: The
Literature of al-­Andalus (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000),
128–29; Ibn Zaydūn, Dīwān (Beirut: Dār Sādir, 1967), 74.

Poem 54. Love’s dialectic of mastery and subjection drives this poem. The
poem may not fit the specific subgenre of Arabic riddle poem, yet it is
layered with riddle-­like employment of jinās, complicated still further by
plays on the visual aspects of Arabic script involving the diacritical dot.
Those who neglect to dot the “i” when writing English, or who have strug-
gled to read the handwriting of those who neglect it, will appreciate the


274 Notes to the Poems
importance of the dot. Arabic has numerous letters that can be distin-
guished one from the other only by such dots, and given the human fal-
libility of copyists and the fragility of a dot on a centuries-­old sheet of
paper, diacritics play a major role in variant readings for a word. The final
verses of this poem are strewn (riddled in fact) with plays on two Arabic
consonants, the dāl (‫( )د‬equivalent to English “d” and the dhāl (‫[ )ذ‬dh],
which is pronounced as the “th” in “thou”), particularly in words based
on the d/l/l root and the dh/l/l root. Most d/l/l-­based words carry mean-
ings of intimacy and closeness while dh/l/l words signify subjection,
humbleness, lowliness. The following two verses, attributed to Ibn ʿArabī
by the historian al-­Maqqarī, suggest a reward in store for anyone who
discerns the proper reading: “Between tadhallul (subjection) and tadallul
(intimacy) is a dot / wherein the scholar loses his way / It is the dot of the
universe. Traverse it / and you’ll gain wisdom and the elixir of life.”

                                                      ٌ‫ـن الـ ـتَّـ ـ َذلُّ ـ ِـل َوالـ ـتَّ ـ َـدلُّ ـ ِـل نـُـ ْق ـطَـة‬
                                                                                                                       َ ْ ‫ب ـَـ ـ‬
                             ِ
                     ‫ـح ـ ـريـ ـ ُـر‬             ِ                               ِ                        ِ
                                  ْ ‫   ف ـ ـيـ ـ َـهـ ــا يَـ ــت ـ ـيـ ــهُ ٱلْـ ـ ـ ـع ـ ـ ــال ال ـ ـنِّـ ـ‬
                                             ‫ِه َي نـُْقطَةُ ْٱلَ ْك ـ َـو ِان إِ ْن َج َاوْزَتا‬
                         ِ                                  ِ ‫ٱلـ‬
                                     َ ‫ـكـيـ َـم َو ِعـلـ ُـمـ‬
                     ُ‫ـك ٱ ِإل ْكــســر‬                       َْ ‫ـت‬َ ‫    ُكـْنـ‬
“Dar al-­Falak” (literally, “The House of the Heavenly Sphere”), mentioned
in verses 1 and 6, is likely a reference to the convent in Baghdad founded
by the caliph Nāṣir li-­ad-­Dīn in 1180, and, as mentioned, the references
to it in this poem have enhanced the enigma regarding the relationship
between Ibn ʿArabī and Niẓām. See Muḥyiddīn Ibn ʿArabī, Deuter der
Sehnsüchte (Turjuman al-­Ashwaq), 2 vols., trans. Wolfgang Hermann
(Zürich: Edition Shershir, 2013–16), 2:284; Addas, Red Sulfur 210–11;
Ḥājj Yūsuf, Shams al-­maghrib, 250–255. For the two “dot” verses attrib-
uted to Ibn ʿArabī by al-­Maqqarī, see Nafh al-­ṭīb, 2:165.

Poem 55. Although this poem is anchored firmly within the ghazal imagi-
nary, it also evokes such themes as fanā’ (the “passing away” of the lover
out of longing for the beloved) and wajd (trance, ecstasy, fervor) that are
among the core concepts in Sufism and specifically within Ibn ʿArabī’s
mystical thought. The poem was also included in Meccan Openings (Fut.,
vol. 5, ch. 179, p. 594). There, Ibn ʿArabī introduces it as being “on the


                                                                                                                          Notes to the Poems 275
topic of the unlimited surge in love that occurs at the moment of vision
and shawq.” He adds the following comment to the poem: “[The poet]
alludes to God’s manifestation in various forms, in the afterlife and within
the world inside the heart of his servant—as is reported in the ḥadith of
Saḥiḥ Muslim [one of two most authoritative hadith collections in Sunni
Islam] regarding the transformation through forms. [Such transforma-
tion] is in accord with the divine ‘essence’ (dhāt), which transcends all
tashbīh (likeness) and takyīf (location).” The words dhāt, tashbīh, and
takyīf are key terms in Ibn ʿArabī’s wider mystical philosophy. The gist of
Ibn ʿArabī’s statement is that God or “the real” (al-­ḥaqq) is infinite; it
eludes confinement within space and time (takyīf) or likeness (tashbīh)
to a finite object or being. Nor can it be excluded from the world or any
aspect of the world. It is at once transcendent to the world and imma-
nent within it, and most fully immanent within the heart of the faithful
servant. The manifestation of the beloved is constantly changing its form
and manifesting itself anew. The mystic’s goal is to achieve constant trans-
formation along with the manifestations of the beloved. This entails the
self ’s passing away in each moment in order to be receptive of the new
manifestation, the joy of receiving that manifestation and joining the be-
loved within it, and the sorrow of losing it as the beloved takes on a new
manifestation.

Poem 56. This homage to Baghdad begins by praising the city over Sindād,
one of several legendary sites of ancient vanished grandeur. Legend
placed Sindād near the town of al-­Ḥīra and provided it with the epithet
“Dhū al-­Shurufāt” (the castle with grand cornices or battlements). Verse
3, “branches are stirred / by the wind and bend, / lovers joined / together
at last,” echoes verse 4 of poem 11: “Spirits moan / in the Gháda
branches, / bending them over / as I pass away.” In his commentary on
poem 11, Ibn ʿArabī notes that the word arwāḥ can mean either spirits or
winds.
    Verse 4, “Násir, Mansúr, best of the caliphs”: a likely reference to the
caliph Nāṣir li-­Dīn Allāh, who ruled 1180–1225. Ibn ʿArabī had a strong
attachment to the person and memory of Nāṣir, as is evident from the
poems of the Tarjumān and from the encomium to him in Sessions of the
Righteous (MAb 1: 87–88). Nāṣir integrated many of the thriving Sufi net-
works of the time into a society of chevaliers ( futuwwā), who, in addition
to other works of gallantry, served to reinforce the caliphate’s military


276 Notes to the Poems
campaigns against the Byzantine Greeks, the Franks, and regional rivals.
(Neither Nāṣir, the Byzantines, the Franks, nor Nāṣir’s nominal subordi-
nates—the Seljuks in Anatolia and the Ayyubids in Egypt and the Le-
vant—anticipated that within a little more than two decades, Hulugu’s
Mongol army would sack Baghdad and abolish the five-­century-­old Ab-
basid caliphate.)
   The likely subtext for the opening of the poem is a verse attributed to
the early Arabic poet al-­Aswad b. Yaʿfūr in one of the earliest collections
of Arabic poetry, the Mufaḍḍaliyyāt. The verse recalls “the peoples of al-­
Khawarnaq and al-­Sadīr and Bāriq / and the castle of Dhū al-­Shurufāt.”
All four of the sites mentioned feature in the Tarjumān. Another version
of al-­Aswad’s poem refers to Sindād by the epithet Dhū al-­Kaʿbāt (the
Castle of the Kaʿbas). Both versions appear in the most famous classical
biography of Muḥammad, The Sīra [Life] of the Messenger of God, by Ibn
Hishām (d. 833). See The Life of Muhammad, trans. A. Guillaume (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1955), 39, 705.

Poem 57. The expression “dream stuff ” in verse 6 is a quotation from Sūra
12 of the Qur’an, which relates the story of Yūsuf ( Joseph). In the Qur’anic
narrative, the Egyptian potentate (al-­ʿAzīz) asks those in his circle to in-
terpret a dream or vision in which he saw seven fat cows being devoured
by seven lean ones, and seven fresh heads of grain along with others that
were dry. Those in his circle reply that what he saw was “dream stuff ”
(aḍghāthu aḥlām: clumps of dreams, often translated as “confused
dreams”) and explain that they are not skilled in dream interpretation.
Later, Joseph goes on to interpret the meaning of what the potentate saw
as foretelling seven years of plenty followed by seven years of scarcity
(Q 12:43–49).

Poem 58. Verse 3, “a voice within” (lisān al-­ḥāl): literally “the tongue or
language of condition (ḥāl).” In Arabic poetry, the ḥāl (pl. aḥwāl) denotes
a powerful state of mind and emotion that comes upon the lover. In Sufi
discourse, it indicates the states of being, emotion, or consciousness that
“come upon” mystics in their quest for the divine beloved. Such states can
oscillate between extremes: union and separation, intimacy and alien-
ation, exhilaration and panic, centeredness and disintegration, expansive-
ness and contraction, intoxication and sobriety, airy lightness and para-
lyzing heaviness. In the Treatise on Sufism of al-­Qushayrī (d. 986), which


                                                      Notes to the Poems 277
Ibn ʿArabī had read and acknowledged as a major influence, a full chapter
unpacks more than two dozen aḥwāl with verses of Arabic love poetry
serving to exemplify many of them. For an introduction to and translation
of Qushayrī’s chapter on the aḥwāl, see Michael Sells, Early Islamic Mysti-
cism (New York: Paulist Press Classics of Western Spirituality, 1996),
97–150. In the verse at hand, the ḥāl emerges as yet another transmitter
in the chain of transmitters bearing the beloved’s words or whereabouts
to the poet. From another perspective, the entire chain of transmitters
given in poem 14 can be considered a classic enumeration of the condi-
tions through which the lover passes.

Poem 59. This poem serves as bookend to poem 2, the collection’s first
long poem, and it contains nearly the same number of verses (fifteen as
opposed to the thirteen of poem 2). Poem 2 ended with the poet on the
verge of death, pleading with a Bilqīs-­like figure to release him from her
grip. She yields or submits (aslamat) to the lover’s prayer for release. Here
a similarly powerful female figure navigates a series of threats and then
submits (aslamat) the lover “to her lethal gaze.” In his commentary to
poem 2, Ibn ʿArabī states that his prayer to be released from the Bilqīs
figure’s spell was uttered in order to avoid the error of ḥulūl, in which the
mystic at the point of fanā’ misinterprets his experience as a union through
divine incarnation. In this poem, it is the Bilqīs figure who submits the
poet’s soul to her gaze, suggesting perhaps that the poet’s earlier hesitation
may have been overcome by the conviction that the fanā’ in question
would not result in the error of ḥulūl.

Poem 60. In this evocation of the days of love and youth, the poet ad-
dresses an unspecified, singular “you” that can indicate the poet, the be-
loved or the sympathetic third party (one of the poet’s friends), or the
listener who is placed rhetorically within the clan of love and longing. In
verse 3, the Arabic lists three desert plants here, artemisia, katam, and
ʿarār. Both katam and ʿarār denote small shrubs prized as firewood. I have
left out the katam to preserve the English cadence.

Poem 61. This final poem centers on a musical theme. It begins by cele-
brating a figure who fits the profile of the jāriya-­diva, the young woman
who dazzles the court with her voice and musicianship. This young
woman, rather than enchanting the court of a caliph, enchants her audi-


278 Notes to the Poems
ence by making them forget the splendorous courts of the caliph Harūn
al-­Rashīd, referred to in the poem as Hādī’s brother. (Rashīd’s brother
Hādī himself was known as an accomplished musician.) She also drives
from memory the chants of Anjasha, the prophet Muḥammad’s camel
driver, who was said to put the camels into a trance through his chanting.
Verse 4, “oud”: literally, “her triple strand” (mithālithahā), which would
likely refer to a type of oud string that was triple-­twisted.
    In the poem and the Tarjumān’s final verses, the poet declares he has
fallen for a girl in Ajyād (a height near Mecca), then immediately and
emphatically corrects himself, stating that she lives instead deep in the
suwād (black) of his liver. As mentioned above in reference to poem 17,
the term evoked the black humor (melancholia) of Greek medicine. At the
same time, blackness here, as throughout the Tarjumān, indicates the
deep interior of something, a place of intimacy, the repository of the se-
cret or mystery (sirr), the innermost core of the heart. In that deep space,
the beloved resides. In his chapter on love in Meccan Openings, Ibn ʿArabī
quotes two unattributed verses expressing the contradictory realities
faced by the lover-­mystic: the lover complains that the beloved is some-
where far away, when that same beloved lives deep within. In the Meccan
Openings poem, the loved ones are found within the black (that is, the
pupil) of the lover’s eye and beneath his ribs (Fut. vol. 5, ch. 178, pp.
593–94). The lover looks without, but they are in the dark center of his
perception. He sighs for those who dwell near (or within) his lungs.

          How strange that I yearn for them and longing
            ask about them while they’re with me
          My eyes weep for them but they’re there
            in their blackness. I sigh and they line my ribs

                                                                               ِ ‫َن أ‬
                                                     ‫َحـ ـ ُّـن إِلَـيْـ ُـهـ ُـم‬   ِّ ‫ـب أ‬ٍ ‫ـج ـ‬           ِ
                                                                                               َ ‫َومـ ـ ْـن َعـ‬
                 ‫َس ـ ـ ـ ـأ َُل َش ـ ْـوقً ــا َعـ ـنـْـ ُـه ـ ُـم َوُه ـ ـ ُـم َمــعِــي‬
                                                                                        ْ ‫   وأ‬
                                                                                           َ
                                                           ِ
                                                     ‫َوتـَْب ِك ُيه ُم َعْي ِن َوُهـ ْـم ف َس َواد َها‬
                                                                             ِ
                 ‫َضلُعِي‬ ْ ‫ـن أ‬                                   ِ
                                  َ ْ َ‫تشتَاقـُُه ْم نـَُفسي َوُهـ ْـم ب ـ‬             ُ ‫   و‬
                                                                                           َ
A similar dynamic occurs near the end of Ibn ʿArabī’s Niẓām preface: “She
dwells among the noble; and she camps among the brave—and in the
black pupil of the eye, and deep within the heart.”


                                                                                                           Notes to the Poems 279
   The poem ends with the declaration that, with the appearance of the
beloved, beauty itself wanders in bewilderment (tāhat), just as, we might
recall, the lords of love found themselves ensnared and bewildered in the
love of which they were the lords.




280 Notes to the Poems
Appendix 1
Niẓā m Pr eface


Prologue
Praise be God, the glorious, the one who acts, the beautiful, the lover of
beauty;1 who created the world in the most complete form and adorned
it; and in making it, apportioned out degrees of wisdom about the be-
yond; who alluded to the place of his secret and determined it; and un-
folded it before his intimates and made it clear;2 who bathed the earth in
beauty and passed his entranced lovers away in the contemplation of that
beauty.

May God bless Muḥammad bin ʿAbdullāh who manifests his most beauti-
ful form who was sent forth with the complete sharia and exemplary life;
destined for the highest station and endowed with universal wholeness.
God’s blessings and peace upon him, his family, and companions.
                                                            Mecca, 598

Now: when I arrived in Mecca in the year 598 (1202 ce), I found a large
number of notables, scholars, and intellectuals—men and women of Per-
sian background—who had settled there. There was no one, however
noble, who was as attentive to the state of their soul and immersed in the
moment as the learned shaykh and imam of the shrine of Abraham (bless-
ings upon him): that immigrant to the sacred land, Makīn al-­Dīn bin Rus-
tam of Isfahan, may God rest his soul, and his learned and elderly sister,
the Shaykha of the Ḥijāz, Fakhr al-­Nisā’ bint Rustam.3

I heard the shaykh recite from al-­Tirmidhī’s hadith collection and other
works in the company of his circle of distinguished scholars.4 He held his
symposia in a garden, and he was, God rest his soul, a kind and captivating
companion, delightful conversation partner, generous host, and dear



                                                                       281
friend. His advanced age left him free to express exactly what was on
his mind.

As for his sister, Fakhr al-­Nisā’, “Pride of Women”—she should rather be
named “Pride of All Scholars” (men and women alike). She was known
for her impeccable hadith scholarship. So I wrote to her asking permission
to receive her hadith reports from her in person. “My expectation in such
matters has passed,” she responded. “My time has come. Urgent demands
preoccupy me now, and I am unable to grant the sessions you request.
Death seems to be charging in on me, and my advanced age turns me to
contrition.” When her words reached me, I replied, “My condition and
yours in hadith are one / To know and to act accordingly is our only aim.”

She had her brother compose for me a general diploma granting me per-
mission to pass on all of her hadith transmissions and had him deliver it
to me in person. In addition to the general diploma, he also wrote out for
me in his own hand all of his own hadith narrations. In response I com-
posed the following verses for him.

                 I heard al-­Tirmidhī in the voice of Makīn,
                 imām of the people in the Balad al-­Amīn5
                                                    Niẓām

Now, this shaykh (God bless him) had a daughter—a lissome maiden who
would bind the gaze, dazzle a gathering with her speech, and astonish
anyone engaging her in conversation. Her name was Niẓām, and she was
known as Sun Splendor.6

She was the shaykha of the two holy shrines for woman scholars, worship-
pers, itinerants, and renunciates in Mecca and Medina.7 She was, without
exaggeration, the very quintessence of culture throughout the sacred land.
Her gaze cast a deep spell. Her Iraqi wit scintillated. When she elaborated,
she was thorough; when she spoke succinctly, she left her rivals in silence.8
When she spoke with artistic formality, she remained lucidly clear. In
power of expression, she surpassed Qass bin Saʿda; in generosity she put
Maʿn bin Zāʾida to shame; in loyalty she would have left faithful Samawʾal
to stop in his tracks, leap bareback onto the steed of treason, and ride off
in shame.9


282 Appendix 1
Were it not for my concern for small-­minded, suspicious souls, I would
expand further on the character and virtues with which God had endowed
her so generously. She is a rain-­graced meadow, a sun among scholars, the
prodigy of her time, the jewel of her generation; in generosity unstinting,
in aspiration sublime. She was her own father’s teacher. She’s the mistress
of every assembly she graces with her presence. She dwells among the
noble, and she camps among the brave—and in the black pupil of the eye,
and deep within the heart. Tihāma glows in her presence; gardens burst
into life when she is near, the hills bloom. Knowing and acting in her are
one. Her touch is an angel’s, her resolve a king’s.

Whenever I was with her, I remained aware of her noble character and
ever mindful of her aunt and father, my dear friends. In this volume,10 I
have made for her a priceless necklace from the nasibs and decorous
ghazals that I composed.11 Yet I have expressed only a part of what I have
discovered over the course of our long acquaintance, intimate company,
and shared affection; from the subtlety of her thought and the purity of
her station. For she is the request and the fulfillment, she, the virgin most
pure.12 Yet from these treasures and lockets (al-­dhakhāʾir wa al-­aʿlāq),13 I
have harmonized verses from the surges of longing of an impassioned soul.

So I have given voice to an afflicted soul and signaled the relationship we
had, hearkening back to those long-­passed times and that blessed com-
pany. Each name that I mention in this volume refers to her, each yearned-­
for abode is her abode, and throughout this work I employ our ac­customed
style to allude to divine influences, inspirations, and correspondences.14
For, the end for us is better than the beginning.15 In regard to her knowledge
(God grace her with favor), to which I refer, none can better inform you
than one who is ever aware.16

May God protect readers of this volume—as well as those of my larger
poetic dīwān—from unseemly thoughts regarding men of upright char-
acter and celestial concerns. Amen.
   In the name of the almighty, other than whom there is no lord.
   And God speaks the truth and shows the way. (Q 33:4)




                                                           Niẓām Preface   283
Appendix 2
Qu r r at a l-­ʿAy n Pr eface


Here, by the grace of God, is the story of what happened to me when I
was circling the Kaʿba. I was in a particularly sweet state of mind when I
was overcome with a condition [ḥāl] that I had felt before. So as not to
disturb anyone, I withdrew from the area covered with paving-­stones to
the sands along the periphery of the shrine, and continued my circling
there. Some verses came to my mind, and I recited them for myself and
to anyone who might have been listening:
   I wish I knew if they knew
         whose heart they’ve taken
   Or my heart knew which
        high-­ridge track they follow
   Do you see them safe
        or perishing?
   The lords of love are in love
         ensnared, bewildered

No sooner had I spoken than I felt a jolt from a hand softer than undyed
silk. When I turned around, I found before me a Rūmī maiden. Never had
I encountered so radiant a face, so sweet a voice, such modesty; such
refined thought, elegant allusions; such spirit in conversation. There was
none like her in wit, learning, beauty, and intuition.
    “What was it you were saying just now, master?” she asked.
    “I wish I knew if they knew / whose heart they’ve taken,” I said.
    “How very strange that you, the sage (ʿārif) of your time, would say
something like that!” she objected. “Is not everything that is taken known
to the one who takes it? Is it possible to have something and not know it?
On the other hand, it is certainly fitting for one without knowledge


284
(maʿrifa) to exclaim ‘would that I know’!1 The true path requires a sincere
tongue.2 How could one like you fall short in such a way? What was it you
said next, master?” she asked.
   “Or my heart knew which / high-­ridge track they follow,” I said.
   “Master,” she said, “the high-­ridge track leads between two layers of
the heart. Knowledge of it is forbidden. How is it that one like you wishes
for that which cannot be attained? The path requires a sincere tongue.
How is that one like you would fall short in such a way? And what was it
you said next?”
   “Do you see them safe / or perishing?” I said.
   “They are safe indeed,” she said. “What you should be asking is
whether you are safe or perishing. And what did you say after that?”
   “The lords of love in love / are ensnared, bewildered,” I said.
   “Amazing!” she exclaimed. “How can one pierced through the heart
by love have any trace of self left to be bewildered? Love consumes. It
numbs the senses, drives away intellect, astonishes thoughts, and sends
the one in love off with the others who are gone. Where is there place
for bewilderment, and who is left to be bewildered? The path requires a
sincere tongue. It is unbecoming for one like you to fall short in this
regard.”3
   “Cousin,” I said, “may I ask your name?”4
   “Comfort for the eye,” she answered.
   “For me,” I said.5

Then she bid me farewell and departed. Later on, I came to know
her, frequented her company, and beheld in her subtleties of mystical
knowings (may God find favor with her!) that no one could possibly
describe.6




                                                  Qurrat al-­ʿAyn Preface 285
Appendix 3
A pologi a


If I mention a ruin, a station, meadows, or the like; or say “her,” “o you,”
“oh,” or “would it not be”; or speak of him, her, or the two of them; or
mention men or women in the plural; or fate taking me upland to Najd or
down to Tihām; a cloud weeping or a flower that smiles; my words to
camel drivers bound for Hājir’s moringa or Híma’s doves; full moons
veiled in palanquins that pass into the distance; suns or maidens like stars;
lightning, thunder, or the easterly breeze; winds from the north or winds
from the south; a track, ravine, dune, mountain, phantom, or sands; a
friend, journey, garden, hill, thicket, or holy land; maidens with breasts
like rising suns or white marble figurines—; all these and whatever is like
them (understand this!) contain lights and secrets brought by heavenly
riders.
    My heart and the hearts of those like me bear the mark of knowledge—
holy witness that these words are true. So, turn your attention from the
surface and look within—that you may know.




286
Appendix 4
Ibn ʿA r a bī’s Poem on a l-­Z a hr ā’


At the gate to Madīnat al-­Zahrāʾ, I recited the following verses, imagining
the ruins of the caliphal palace there as an abode of birds and wild animals.
Once it was a wonder of al-­Andalus, hard by Cordoba. Let the wise re-
member and the oblivious take heed!
                   Empty chambers glimmer
                     with sunset, desolate
                   At every side, birds wail,
                      then pause, then renew their cry
                   To one who stood alone
                     in anguish, I asked why
                   Why are you grieving so?
                    For time now passed, he said,
                       never to return

                                                                                  ِ ‫ِدي ـ ـ ــارا بِـ ـأَ ْك ــنَ ـ‬
                                                                 ِ ‫ـاف ٱلْــمــغِ ـيـ‬
                                               ‫ـب تـُـلَـ ِّـمـ ُـع‬        َ                           ً َ
                                         ِ   ٍ  ِ                 ِ        ِ
                   ‫   وَم ــا أَ ْن بَــا م ـ ْـن َســاك ـن َوه ـ َـى ب ـَْلـ َقـ ُـع‬
                                                                                    َ
                                                     ‫ب‬ٍ ِ‫يـَنَوح َعلَيـَْها ٱلطَّيـْر ِم ْن ُك ِّل َجان‬
                                                                                   ُ              ُ
                          ِ                        ِ
                   ‫َح ــيَ ــانً ــا َوحـ ـي ــنً ــا ي ـَ ـ ْـرجـ ـ ُـع‬  ُ ‫ـص ـ ُـم ـ‬
                                                                      ْ ‫ـت أ‬        ْ ‫   فـَــيَ ـ‬
                                                ‫ـت ِم ـنْـ َـه ــا طَ ــائِ ـ ًـرا ُمـ ـت ـَـ َف ـ ِّـرًدا‬             َ ‫فَـ‬
                                                                                                        ُ ‫ـخ ــاطَـ ْـب ـ‬
                                                ِ ‫ـج ـ ٌـن ِف ٱلْ ـ َق ـ ْل ـ‬
                   ُ‫ـب َوْه ـ ـ َـو ُم ـ ـ َـرَّوع‬                                    َ ‫   لَـ ــهُ َش ـ‬
                                              ‫ـوح َوتَ ْشتَ ِكي‬                                ُ ‫ف ـَ ُقـ ْلـ‬
                                                                ُ ‫ـت َعـلَــى َم ــا َذا ت ـَـنُـ‬
                   ‫ـس ي ـَْـرِجـ ُـع‬            َ ‫ـال َعـلَــى َد ْه ـ ٍر َمـ‬
                                  َ ‫ـضــى لَـ ْـيـ‬                            َ ‫   ف ـَ َقـ‬
                            (Ibn ʿArabī, Sessions of the Righteous
                  [MAb 2:259–60]; Maqqarī, Nafḥ al-­Ṭīb [1:123])


                                                                                                                               287
Appendix 5
Chronology of Ibn ʿA r a bī’s
Life a nd Times


1165      Birth of Ibn ʿArabī in Murcia, Spain, on the 17th of Ramadan
          565 H.
1171      Saladin abolishes the three-­hundred-­year Fatimid Caliphate,
          establishing the Ayyubid Dynasty. Death of ʿAbd al-­Qādir al-­
          Jilānī.
1171–72   Ibn ʿArabī’s family settles in Seville, northern capital of the al-­
          Muwaḥḥid (Almohad) Empire, which was based in the North
          African city of Marrakesh.
1180      Ibn ʿArabī meets the philosopher and jurist Ibn Rushd (Aver-
          roes) in Córdoba.
1181      Ibn ʿArabī embarks on the mystical path. Birth of Ibn al-­Fāriḍ.
1187      Saladin retakes Jerusalem.
1195      Ibn ʿArabī in Tunis, frequents the Sufi shaykh ʿAbd al-­ʿAzīz
          al-­Mahdawī.
1195–97   Ibn ʿArabī in Fez, experiences a series of mystical visions.
1188–89   Ibn ʿArabī in Andalusia, farewell tour of his native land.
1199      Attends funeral of Ibn Rushd in Córdoba.
1201      Death of Ibn al-­Jawzī, the Hanbalite preacher and author
          whose writings on the hajj were particularly appreciated by
          Ibn ʿArabī.
1201–02   Ibn ʿArabī in Marrakesh, then in Tunis, where he spends sev-
          eral months with al-­Mahdawī.
1202      Travels to Cairo, visits tomb of Abraham in Hebron, al-­Aqṣa
          mosque in Jerusalem, and Muḥammad’s tomb in Medina,
          before arriving in Mecca in July or August.
1202–04   Ibn ʿArabī in Mecca, where he frequents the symposia of the
          scholar and pious devotee Ẓāhir bin Rustam of Isfāhān, re-



288
         ceives hadith transmissions through his sister, Fakhr al-­Nisā’,
         and encounters his daughter, Niẓām.
1204     Death of Maimonides. Crusaders plunder Constantinople.
1207     Birth of Jalāl ad-­Dīn Rūmī.
1209     Death of the Persian mystic Ruzbehān Baqlī in Shiraz.
1211     Seljuk Turkish prince Kaykaus assumes rule over the Sultan-
         ate of Rūm in Anatolia, where Ibn ʿArabī, Jalāl al-­Dīn Rūmī,
         and other mystics would find hospitality and support.
1212     Ibn ʿArabī in Baghdad, corresponds with Kaykaus. Birth of
         the poet and mystic Abū al-­Ḥasan al-­Shushtarī in Guadix
         (Wadi Ash) near Granada.
1214     Ibn ʿArabī composes Tarjumān al-­Ashwāq.
1215     Ibn ʿAdīm reads portions of the Tarjumān commentary to an
         assembly of Aleppan notables.
1215     Ibn ʿArabī back in Anatolia, at Sivas and Malatya (Melitene),
         where he completes the Tarjumān commentary.
1223     Ibn ʿArabī settles in Damascus where he receives the support
         of the Ayyubid ruler.
1225     Death of Abbasid caliph Nāṣir li-­Dīn Allāh, whose decades-­
         long rule witnessed an explosive growth in organized Sufi
         networks.
1229     Death of Farīd al-­Dīn ʿAṭṭār. Rūmī’s family settles in the Ana-
         tolian cultural center of Konya.
1232–37 Rūmī in Aleppo and Damascus. No historical evidence he met
         Ibn ʿArabī.
1235     Death of Ibn al-­Fāriḍ in Cairo. Ibn ʿArabī composes The Ring-
         stones of Wisdom.
1236     Córdoba falls to the Reconquista.
1237     Ibn ʿArabī completes his Great Dīwān.
1238     Ibn ʿArabī completes the second edition of the Meccan Open-
         ings.
ca. 1238 Reputed birth of Yunus Emre, master of love poetry and mys-
         tical poetry in Turkish.
1240     Death of Ibn ʿArabī in Damascus, the 22nd of Rābīʿ al-­Thāni,
         638 H; November 10, 1240 ce.




                                Chronology of Ibn ʿArabī’s Life and Times   289
Appendix 6
Esta blishing the Text:
M a nuscr ipts, Editions, a nd Method


The manuscript evidence for Ibn ʿArabī’s writings is exceptionally strong.
By the time he arrived in Damascus in 1221 ce, Ibn ʿArabī was accompa-
nied by a faithful and expanding group of followers. They produced copies
of his texts and recited them in his presence, often in the presence of
others. During an occasion known as a “hearing” (samāʿ), Ibn ʿArabī
would listen to a copy of his text as it was read aloud. He would then make
any needed corrections before approving the copy. Those present at the
hearing would sign the new copy under Ibn ʿArabī’s own handwritten,
signed attestation of approval. In some cases, there would be more than
one hearing for a given copy before the author would grant the final at-
testation of approval. These sessions served simultaneously as both edit-
ing and publishing workshops and as advanced seminars. Original copies,
with Ibn ʿArabī’s signed approval, are called “autographs.” Copies signed
by those who were present at a hearing are themselves called “hearings.”
Remarkably, Ibn ʿArabī left a number of “holograph manuscripts,” that is,
manuscripts that were composed entirely in the hand of the author—in-
cluding most of his voluminous Meccan Openings and a significant part of
his Great Dīwān.
    Although there are no known surviving holograph or autograph manu-
scripts of the Tarjumān, there can be little doubt that Ibn ʿArabī authored
it. The Tarjumān poems are found in both Sessions of the Righteous and
Dīwān al-­maʿārif; they are consistent with the style of dozens of other
nasib and ghazal poems in Dīwān al-­maʿārif; several are quoted or refer-
enced in Meccan Openings; and the Priceless Treasures commentary fits in
with Ibn ʿArabī’s wider mystical-­philosophical oeuvre, both in terms of
content and, crucially, in terms of Ibn ʿArabī’s distinctive mode of literary
expression. Over the past fifty years, scholars have identified and cata-



290
loged dozens of manuscripts for both works. A number of those manu-
scripts are of high historical significance and quality.
   Historically significant manuscripts include information on the “origi-
nal” from which the copy was transmitted down through centuries by
copyists, often with the name of the final copyist and the date of that copy.
In each stage of the transmission process, the copyist was expected to
check his copy against the original or the copy from which he was work-
ing, often under the supervision of an acknowledged expert on the work
and its transmission—in much the way modern, responsible editions are
given careful proofreading, copyediting, and page-­proof checks. Al-
though copyists, as they would point out in their final comments, were
humble, all-­too-­fallible humans, a robust set of manuscripts from different
transmission families allows the Tarjumān’s modern editor considerable
clarity in establishing the Arabic text, especially in view of the major ad-
vance in scholarship on Ibn ʿArabī’s manuscripts that has occurred over
the past decade. For recent work on the manuscripts of Ibn ʿArabī, see
Osman Yahya, Histoire et Classification de l’Oeuvre d’Ibn ʿArabī (Damascus,
1964) ; Jane Clark and Stephen Hirtenstein, “Establishing Ibn ʿArabī’s
Heritage,” JMIAS 52 (2012): 1–32; Jane Clark, “Mystical Perception and
Beauty: Ibn ʿArabī’s Preface to Tarjumān al-­ashwāq,” JMIAS 55 (2014):
33–62; and Stephen Hirtenstein, “In the Master’s Hand: A Preliminary
Study of Ibn ʿArabī’s Holographs and Autographs,” JMIAS 60 (2016):
65–106.
   Below are the sources used for the establishment of this edition, begin-
ning with the manuscript I have used as the base, and following with the
other sources by order of their historical pedigree and copyist accuracy.
This edition adopts the formally correct forms for broken plurals in prefer-
ence to the manuscript base and printed editions based on it in which yā’
replaced hamza, possibly under the influence of pronunciation in areas of
Turkish and Persian influence, neither of which languages includes a
hamza equivalent.
   Although the sixty-­one poems of the Tarjumān included in the first
printed edition by Nicholson in 1911 are almost certainly authentic, and
there is little ambiguity in the sequencing of verses within each poem, my
current work finds that the sequencing of the last ten poems within the
Tarjumān is not standard within the most reliable manuscripts. Ibn
ʿArabī may have transmitted the Tarjumān poems in different sequences



                                        Manuscripts, Editions, and Method 291
at different times, just as he may have produced various prefatory and
commentary material at different periods. The influence of the Nicholson
edition on subsequent printings and translations has established the mod-
ern expectation for how the Tarjumān poems are sequenced; and al-
though the more historic and higher-­quality manuscripts consulted for
this edition offer a variety of sequences for the last part of the collection,
I have seen no reason to complicate matters by departing from Nichol-
son’s ordering of the poems.

Manuscripts Consulted

RP   Rāghib Pāsha 1453, 181b–202b
The manuscript, which is itself undated, bears a copy of a verification by
Ibn ʿArabī dated 614/1217. It begins with the prologue and versified apo-
logia, followed by the jāriya preface, including poem 1. There follows the
full text of poems 2–61, which is followed in turn with the epilogue. The
text is composed in a clear script, with consistent accuracy and extensive
vocalization, and is in excellent physical condition. The final poems are
presented in the following order: 50, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 51, 52, 53.
This document offers a window into the transmission process at the time
of Ibn ʿArabī and over the following centuries.
   After the final verse, the text reads:
     The author [Ibn ʿArabī] of this book declares: “All the verses that I
     composed (naẓamtu) for this volume were completed with the help
     of God in a state of ritual purity during the ʿUmra visit as I men-
     tioned earlier [in the months of Rajab, Shaʿbān, and Ramaḍān in
     the year 611 [Nov 1214–Feb 1215 ce]—with the exception of the
     verses that begin with “I wish I knew if they knew whose heart they
     have taken” [poem 1], for that incident took place in the year 604
     [1207–1208 ce]. Praise be to God and blessings and peace upon
     Muḥammad and his family. The text was completed on the fifth day
     of the month of Rajab the Bounteous (al-­ashabb) in the year 614
     [Oct–Nov 1217 ce] in the city of Malatya [Melitene] in the lands of
     the Greeks [Yunān, lands formerly held by the Byzantine Roman
     Empire]—may God have mercy on its writer (kātib), his parents,
     and on all of the community of Muḥammad, peace upon him.”
There follows a colophon that states:


292 Appendix 6
     Muḥammad bin ʿAlī bin Muḥammad bin al-­ʿArabī al-­Ṭāʾī declares,
     “This volume, Tarjumān al-­Ashwāq, which I authored (min
     inshāʾī), was recited before me by the most learned imam and
     scholar ʿImād al-­Dīn [ J]abr bin ʿAlī bin ʿAlī al-­Barmakī (may he
     find God’s favor), as I listened personally, during a single session
     (majlis). I approved for him a general permission (ijāza) to pass
     on my narrations (riwāyātī) and my written works (muṣannafātī)
     according to the usual stipulations among practitioners in this area
     (ahl hādhā al-­shaʾn); and I was pleased to bestow upon him that
     ijāza on the 3rd day of the month of Rajab the Unique (al-­fard) in
     the year 614 [Oct 6, 1217 ce]—praise be to God and with blessings
     and peace on Muḥammad and his family.”
It appears from the wording of the colophon that the session with
Barmakī would have occurred on 5 Rajab, two days after Ibn ʿArabī be-
stowed the general ijāza upon him.
M   Manissa 6596, 78a–91a
This manuscript is undated but bears a note saying that it was taken from
the personal copy of the work held by Ibn ʿArabī’s most important com-
panion and literary heir, Ṣadr al-­Dīn al-­Qunawī. It is composed in clear
script, although without the elegance of RP, and confirms RP in the vast
majority of cases where variants of particular words exist. It breaks off
abruptly after verse 5 of poem 31.
F   Fātiḥ 5322, 1181–1511
The copy is dated 934 H. It begins with the Dhakhā’ir introduction (and
611 naẓamtu), followed by the versified apologia and the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn
preface, and then proceeds with a full copy of al-­Dhakhā’ir. The title
page states that it was originally written in 622 H in the month of Jumādā
al-­Ākhira by Ibn ʿArabī’s companion Ayyūb Badr al-­Dīn al-­Manṣur al-­
Muqrī (al-­Miṣrī al-­Jarāʾidī). It also contains a replica of the shaykh’s at-
testation of approval (ijāza), which the shaykh would have written in his
own hand on the original manuscript. (For an account of Ibn ʿArabī’s
transmission circles, see Addas, Red Sulfur, 245–70; on Ayyūb Badr al-­
Dīn in particular, idem, 265–68).
EM-­a   Evkaf Musezi 1713, 252–366
This copy is dated 873 H. The copyist states that it was copied from a
manuscript that had been read out before Ibn ʿArabī. It begins with a


                                        Manuscripts, Editions, and Method 293
piece of the prologue, apologia, and Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface, followed by
Dhakhā’ir, followed by the rest of the prologue. The Dhakhā’ir text is
complete, but as with RP, the final poems are sequenced in a manner
that differs from that of Nicholson’s edition. The sequence in EM-­a is as
follows: 1–47, 49, 51, 54, 55, 57, 58, 48, 52, 50, 53, 56, 59, 60, 61. The title
page states the copy was based on the original written by the same com-
panion of Ibn ʿArabī, Ayyūb Badr al-­Dīn al-­Manṣūr al-­Miṣrī al-­Jarā’idī,
mentioned above. A colophon on the final page dates the copy to 873 H
and affirms that the copy had been collated with the text that had been
recited (apparently by Ayyūb Badr al-­Dīn) before Ibn ʿArabī and which
had received his signed approval.
EM-­b   Evkaf Müzesï 1713, 367–69
This text begins right after EM-­a. It consists solely of the Niẓām preface
and is dated 888 H.
P   Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France (Arabe BN 2583)
This copy of Dīwān al-­Maʿārif places the sixty-­    one poems of the
Tarjumān, in the standard sequence, at the end of the Dīwān (ff. 250–73),
along with the full Dhakhāʾir commentary for poems 1–14. The com-
mentary ends with poem 15, verse 3 (f. 267r).
AS-­a   Ayasofia 1723 1–96
The copyist, Ilyās bin Shaykh ʿAbd al-­Salām, dates his copy to 835 H.
The manuscript, written in a clear dual-­color script (with the poems in
red), takes the following sequence: Niẓām preface, part of the epilogue,
apologia, Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface, Dhakhā’ir, and the part of the epilogue
mentioning the two companions (Badr al-­Ḥabashī and Ibn Sawdakīn)
that asked Ibn ʿArabī to compose the commentary. The sequence of the
final poems is: 31, 33–49, 54–55, 57–58, 32, 48, 52, 50, 53, 56, 59–61.
AS-­b   Ayasofia 1724, 1–127
The undated AS-­b begins with the introduction to Dhakhā’ir, followed by
the versified apologia and the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface. There follows the
first part of Dhakhā’ir, but the manuscript breaks off abruptly after verse
3 of poem 27. The title page contains an epigraph of several verses that
are not found in the Tarjumān, including the “inna al-­hawā ʿujmatun”
poem that Ibn ʿArabī included in his Muḥāḍarat al-­Abrār (vol. 2, p. 476,
of the 1968 edition referenced below).



294 Appendix 6
K   Kutuhaya 111, 1a–73a
This manuscript of al-­Dhakhā’ir is transmitted from an original copy
made by Khalīl al-­Ḥalabī bin al-­Ḥājj Aḥmad al-­Miṣrī on 18 Muḥarram
640 H in Damascus, in the ribāṭ (lodge) of al-­Shimshānī (or al-­Shimsānī).
Despite its historical quality, elegant script, and dual-­color arrange-
ment (with the poems in red), the copy is riddled with errors. It takes
the following sequence: prologue, Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface, apologia, al-­
Dhakhā’ir (in full), epilogue.

Printed Editions Consulted

Reynold Nicholson 1911   Nicholson used the manuscript Cambridge
OR 1462/9 (Cambridge University Library) as the default text for his edi-
tion. It was in Nicholson’s private collection at that time and dates from
1025 H (1616–17 ce). As Nicholson notes, it contains the text of the
poems (in red ink) and the Dhakhā’ir commentary. Nicholson also points
out “inscriptions on the last page certify that it has been twice diligently
collated and corrected.” In addition to Cambridge OR 1462/9, Nicholson
consulted and represents in his apparatus two other manuscripts: Leiden
875 (2) Warn., which he states contains “only the text of the poems, with
a preface and is dated 922 H”; and Leiden 641 Warn., of which he writes
that it “is dated 984 H and contains both text and commentary.”
Sh   The 1995 edition of Dhakhā’ir by al-­Shuqayrī is based upon five
manuscripts. They include a microfilm of a manuscript in Basra that is
held at the University of Arab States and four manuscripts held in Cairo’s
Dār al-­Kutub (Adab 6614 dated 969 H; Adab 4393 dated 904 H; Adab
Ṭalʿat 4089 dated 1273 H; and Adab Ṭalʿat 4373 dated 1079 H), along
with the Nicholson 1911 edition (Muḥammad ʿAlam al-­Dīn Shuqayrī,
Dhakhā’ir al-­aʿlāq: Sharḥ Tarjumān al-­ashwāq [al-­Haram [Egypt]: al-­
ʿAyn lil-­Dirāsāt wa-­al-­Buḥūth al-­Insāniyya wa-­al-­Ijtimāʿiyya, 1995]). Al-­
Shuqayrī includes extensive introductory material and is careful to note
and cite the hadith traditions alluded to by Ibn ʿArabī in commentary.
Shuqayrī also gives one of the manuscripts (Adab Ṭalʿat 4089) the very
same origin as that of K as described above: from 18 Muḥarram 640 H,
written in the ribāṭ of al-­Shimshānī, although Shuqayrī does not specify
the name of the writer. He does state, however, that the copy he has in-
spected is riddled with errors.



                                         Manuscripts, Editions, and Method 295
DS   The Beirut Dār Ṣādir edition (available in several undated print-
ings), although useful and widely distributed, does not explain its manu-
script base.

Manuscript and Printed Editions of Sessions of the Righteous
(Kitāb muḥāḍarat al-­abrār wa-­musāmarat al-­akhyār fī al-­adībāt
wa-­al-­nawādir wa-­al-­aḥbār)
As mentioned, the large part of the Tarjumān, including almost all of its
long poems, appears in MAb, which contains 34 of the 61 poems com-
prising 319 of the Tarjumān’s 576 verses. In addition to MAb (discussed
above), I have studied the following:
MAb1  TSM   Topkapi Sarayi Müzesï III: Ahmed Kïtapliği 2415.
This manuscript of Muḥāḍarāt al-­Abrār is written in clear script. It is not
reliable for the prose sections of the text, but the poems, including those
from the Tarjumān, are more accurately represented.
MAb2   The Cairo 1888 al-­Maktaba al-­ʿUthmāniyya edition. No editor
named.
MAb3   The Cairo 1906 printed at Maktaba al-­Saʿāda in Cairo by
Mustafā al-­Sayyid Aḥmad Tāj al-­Kutubī in Ṭanṭa and his son Ibrāhīm Tāj.
MAb4   The Beirut 1968 Dār al-­Yaqẓa al-­ʿArabīyya printed edition.
MAb5   The Beirut 2007 Dār al-­Kutub al-­ʿIlmiyya edition, edited
by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-­Karīm al-­Namarī, which is nearly identical to Bei-
rut 1968, with the exception of the translator’s introduction and the
pagination.
The Tarjumān poems in MAb, in order of appearance, are as follows (with
page numbers coinciding with those in MAb4):
  1. Poem 8 [MAb 1:260–61]
  2. Poem 36 [MAb 1:261]
  3. Poem 44 [MAb 1:282–83]
  4. Poem 21 [MAb 1:288–89, which is missing verse 5]
  5. Poem 25 [MAb 1:289–90]
  6. Poem 12 [MAb 1:290]
  7. Poem 27 [MAb 1:290, introduced by “I was circling the Kaʿba one
   night when I was overcome with a very sweet mood, and I said in


296 Appendix 6
   complaint of the thirst I suffered during my desert journey, ‘Old
   shrine high above . . .’” (ṭuftu laylan bi-­l-­bayti fa adrakanī t-­taʿabu,
   fa qultu atʿabu nafsī ʿalā l-­badīhati min ghayr rawiyyatin: yā ayyuhā
   l-­baytu l-­ʿatīqu . . .)]
  8. Poem 13 [MAb 1:291]
  9. Poem 28 [MAb 1:291–92]
 10. Poem 5 [MAb 1:292–93]
 11. Poem 9 [MAb 1:293]
 12. Poem 34 [MAb 1:293]
 13. Poem 15 [MAb 1:318]
 14. Poem 11 [MAb 1:319–20, without the two suspect verses]
 15. Poem 33 [MAb 1:320]
 16. Poem 14 [MAb 1:338–39]
 17. Poem 10 [MAb 1:345]
 18. Poem 30 [MAb 1:345–47]
 19. Poem 7 [MAb 1:349]
 20. Poem 17 [MAb 1:360]
 21. Poem 32 [MAb 1:360]
 22. Poem 6 [MAb 1:360–61]
 23. Poem 29 [MAb 1:368–69, with a variant reading for verses 17–19]
 24. Poem 35 [MAb 1:369]
 25. Poem 18 [MAb 1:370]
 26. Poem 16 [MAb 1:386–87]
 27. Poem 1 with the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn story [MAb 2:56–58]
 28. Poem 2 [MAb 2:58–59]
 29. Poem 3 [MAb 2:59, which is introduced by these words: “I once
   had a wife who was the solace of my eyes (Qurrat al-­ʿAyn), but time
   and circumstances came between us. I recalled her and her resi-
   dence at Ḥilla (or Ḥalba), near Baghdad.”]
 30. Poem 4 [MAb 2:59]
 31. Poem 41 [MAb 2:372–73]
 32. Poem 20 [MAb 2:386–87, introduced by “And among our poems
   on Niẓām (wa lanā fī n-­niẓāmiyyāt) is . . .”]
 33. Poem 55 [MAb 2:438]
 34. Poem 57 [MAb 2:468]

The Tarjumān poems represented in MAb, according to Nicholson’s
Tarjumān sequence: 1–18; 20–21; 25; 27–30; 32–36; 41; 44–45; 55; 57.


                                         Manuscripts, Editions, and Method 297
Poem 11 of Tarjumān al-Ashwāq (MS Ragıp Paşa #1453,
           Süleymaniye Library, Istanbul).
Appendix 7
A n notated Chronology of
ta rjum ā n Tr a nslations

Reynold A. Nicholson, The Tarjumán Al-­Ashwáq: A Collection of Mysti-
  cal Odes. London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1911. Includes a complete
  Arabic text and translation along with a translation of most of the
  prefatory material and selected portions of the commentary.
Vicente Cantarino, Casidas de amor profundo y místico. México: Porrúa,
  1977. In this anthology, devoted to poems by Ibn Zaydūn and Ibn
  ʿArabī, the translator includes all 61 poems of the Tarjumān, along
  with an overview of their poetics, including metrics, alliteration and
  punning, and other features.
Sami-­Ali, Le Chant de l’ardent désir. Arles: Actes Sud, 1989. This work
  consists of selections of poems and passages of poems from through-
  out the Tarjumān.
Maurice Gloton, L’interprète des Désirs = Turjumān Al-­Ashwāq. Paris:
  Albin Michel, 1996. Includes full translations of all the poems and
  prefatory material as well as a nearly complete translation of the com-
  mentary. Gloton’s work broke new ground with the commentary and
  remained the only translation of it until the German-­language transla-
  tion by Wolfgang Hermann discussed below.
Michael Sells, Stations of Desire: Love Elegies from Ibn ʻArabi and New
  Poems. Jerusalem: Ibis Editions, 2000. This volume includes transla-
  tions of Tarjumān poems 1–19, 21, 24–25, 48, and 50.
———, Bewildered: Love Poems from Ibn ʿArabī’s Translation of Desires.
  Paris: The Post-­Apollo Press, 2018. This volume includes translations
  of Tarjumān poems 1, 6–9, 11–13, 19–20, 22–23, 31–33, 36–37, 39,
  41, 45–47, 49, 51, 55, 57, 59–61. [Note: The translations of Stations
  of Desire and Bewildered were based on harmonizing the selected
  poems into styles adjusted according to the interior exigencies of the
  given selection and in consideration of the intended readership; even
  as this present volume adopts a different style for the same reason.]


                                                                     299
Carlos Varona Narvión, El Intérprete de los Deseos = (Taryuman Al-­
  Aswaq), Traducción y Comentarios. Murcia: Editora Regional de
  Murcia, 2002. This is a complete translation of the poems and prefa-
  tory material, along with commentary selections (which are for the
  most part the same passages selected by Nicholson for translation),
  as well the translator’s overview of the poetics, mystical resonances,
  style, and other aspects of the Tarjumān.
Georg Bossong, Das Wunder von al-­Andalus: Die schönsten Gedichte
  aus dem Maurischen Spanien. Munich: C. H. Beck, 2005. In a rich
  selection of Arabic and Hebrew poetry from al-­Andalus, the transla-
  tor includes Tarjumān poems 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14, 26, 27, 57, and 49 along
  with Ibn ʿArabī’s elegy for the palace of al-­Zahrā’ outside of Córdoba
  from Sessions of the Righteous (see appendix 4) as well as notes on
  rhyme, meter, and previous translations.
Mahmud Kanık, Arzuların tercümanı. İstanbul: Iz Yayinlari, 2006. A
  translation into modern Turkish.
R. Rossi Testa, L’interprete delle passioni. Milano: Apogeo, 2008. A
  translation of the Tarjumān poems as well as the excerpts of Ibn
  ʿArabī’s commentary that had been translated by Nicholson into
  English.
Hamza Tanyas, Arzuların tercümanı. İstanbul: Kaknus, 2010. A transla-
  tion into modern Turkish.
Alma Giese, Urwolke und Welt: Mystische Texte des Größten Meisters.
  Munich: C. H. Beck, 2015. This work includes a section (pp. 226–
  303) of translations of selected poems from the Tarjumān along with
  full translations of Ibn ʿArabī’s commentaries on them. The poems
  selected are 6, 9, 10, 12, 13, 17, 24, 26, 27, 33, 35, 41, 44, 45, 53, 54,
  and 49.
Wolfgang Hermann, Ibn ʻArabi, Muhyiddin. Deuter der Sehnsüchte
  (Turjuman al-­Ashwaq): Band 1 (Gedichte 1–20). Trans. Wolfang
  Hermann. Zurich: Edition Shershir, 2013.
———, Deuter der Sehnsüchte (Turjuman al-­Ashwaq): Band 2 (Gedichte
  21–61). Zurich: Edition Shershir, 2013. Hermann’s two volumes in-
  clude fine translations of all the poems, prefatory material, and com-
  mentary, with extensive notes on the vocabulary, idiom, philological,
  and lyrical contexts for the poems. They also identify subtexts within
  the Qur’an, hadith, and early Arabic poetry, and provides extensive
  transliterations of key terms used within the poems and commentary.


300 Appendix 7
  A major contribution to the understanding of Ibn ʿArabī and the es-
  sential work on Ibn ʿArabī’s Priceless Treasures.
Stefan Weidner, Der Übersetzer der Sehnsüchte Liebesgedichte aus dem
  arabischen Mittelalter. Salzburg: Jung u. Jung, 2016. Weidner trans-
  lates the poems of the Tarjumān as well as the prefaces to them. His
  translation adopts a variable approach to the Arabic verses, which
  can entail moving between couplets, triplets, and quatrains within a
  single poem.
Ensemble Ibn Báya, Cofradía Shustari, Omar Metioui, and Eduardo
  Paniagua, Ibn ʿArabī (Murcia 1165–Damasco 1240), El Intérprete de
  los deseos (Taryumán al-­Ashwáq): Poems from the Tarjumān Selected
  by Pablo Beneito, with Translations into Spanish, English, and French
  by Carlos Varona, Reynold Nicholson, Henri Gloton, and Pablo Beneito.
  Madrid: Pneuma, 2002.




                          Annotated Chronology of Tarjumān Translations   301
Glossa ry


Note: Each word below is indicated first in anglicized form with stress
accent markers meant to allow the word to fit into the English verse
soundscape, and then by the word in formal transliteration. In Arabic
usage, place-­names usually contain the definite article, in contrast to Eng-
lish usage. Thus, the full Arabic name for ʿaqūq, in the second entry below,
is al-­ʿaqūq, and so on for the majority of the Arabic place-­names listed.
Ajyādi (ajyād, with grammatical suffix kept in the anglicized form of the
     word as it appears in the poems, for the sake of euphony). A height
     near Mecca overlooking the Kaʿba.
Aqūq (ʿaqūq), Khawárnaq (khawarnaq), Sadīr (sadīr), and Sindād (sin­
     dād). Ancient castles in the regions between northeast Arabia and
     Iraq, the ruins of which exemplified the lost grandeur of the past.
Árafa (ʿarafa or ʿarafat). The plain and adjoining mount near Mecca where
     Muḥammad gave his last sermon and where hajj pilgrims stand
     through the afternoon in remembrance of that event. At this time,
     the pilgrims also chant labbayka, “here I am for you,” the expression
     each person will utter at the final judgment.
Ālij (ʿālij). The vast dunescape in north-­central Arabia, known more
     commonly today as the Nefūd.
Bilqīs (bilqīs). The name given by tradition to the Queen of Sheba, whose
     story appears in Q 27:15–44.
Bishr (bishr). The ghazal poet known for his love of Hind, a love that led
     him to be known as “Bishr Hind.” The romance of Bishr and Hind
     was included in Isfahānī’s Great Book of Songs.
Dhū al-­Qarnayn (“the two-­horned one”). Dhū al-­Qarnayn, who appears
     in the Qur’an with mythic capabilities, was identified in Islamic lore
     with Alexander the Great (Iskandar, Iskander) or, alternatively, with
     King Cyrus of Persia. He is able to travel across the world from West
     to East on the cords (asbāb) of the heavenly firmament. He also con-



                                                                         303
     structs a great dam to wall off Gog and Magog (yajūj and majūj), the
     apocalyptic peoples or tribes who, once unleashed, will bring on the
     end-­times.
Gháda (ghaḍā). A thick-­trunked tree of the Arabian desert, valued for
     the shelter it provided and prized for use as cooking coals. In his
     commentary, Ibn ʿArabī associates the tree with fire, and more spe-
     cifically with the fire in the lover’s heart, and with the “burning tree”
     from which the divine voice addressed Mūsā.
Hadītha (ḥadītha). A city in Iraq on the Euphrates River.
Hājir (ḥājir). A relay station in Arabia associated in the Tarjumān with
     the notions of “interdiction” and “prohibition.” There were at least
     two different stations by that name on classical pilgrimage routes
     from Iraq to Mecca and Medina. One was southeast of al-­Ḥīra in Iraq,
     toward the beginning of the Iraq-­to-­Mecca pilgrimage route. Ibn
     Jubayr includes it in his pilgrimage account, and Ibn ʿArabī would
     have passed through it on his way to or from Mecca. The second, on
     the same route, is far to the southwest, a bit south of the central ex-
     panse of the ʿĀlij desert, near the present-­day city of Hāʾil. The con-
     sonantal root of ḥājir, ḥ/j/r, is associated not only with the meanings
     mentioned above but also with words for “stone.” The semicircular
     wall near the Kaʿba is known as al-­ḥijr. Al-­Ḥijr is also a name for the
     city of Madāʾin Ṣāliḥ, the ancient Nabataean site in central Arabia.
     The site was associated in Islamic tradition with the city of Thamūd,
     destroyed when its people refused to follow the guidance of their
     prophet Ṣāliḥ and instead committed a sacrilegious slaughter of the
     camel mare of God.
Halba (ḥalba). A neighborhood in Baghdad.
Híma, al-­Híma (ḥimā). A ḥimā is a sacred tribal pasture in Bedouin
     Arabia, marked with boundary stones, the transgression of which
     by another tribe would lead to war. In Ibn ʿArabī’s poems, al-­ḥimā
     could be taken as a common noun, “the sanctuary” or “the private
     pastureland,” or as a place-­name, as I have done by capitalizing it in
     the translation.
Ídam (iḍam). A name attributed to more than one site in Arabia that in
     the poetry of Ibn ʿArabī and Ibn al-­Fāriḍ is associated with yearning
     for a past sense of belonging.
Idrīs (idrīs). An ancient Qur’anic prophet who was associated in later tra-
     dition with Enoch and in some significant instances with Hermes


304 Glossary
     Trismegistus, a god of wisdom at the heart of the late antique her-
     metic tradition. In the Arabic tradition, including the classical ac-
     counts of Muḥammad’s heavenly ascent (miʿrāj) as well as philosoph-
     ical and Sufi writings, Idrīs is associated with the fourth heavenly
     sphere, that of the sun. In Islamic lore, Idrīs became an exemplar of
     learning and wisdom, credited, among other things, with the inven-
     tion of writing.
Iskandar. See Dhū al-­Qarnayn.
Jem (jamʿ). A site near Mecca, known more commonly as Muzdalifa, at
     which pilgrims reassemble for a time during their rigorous journey
     from ʿArafāt back to Minā. The literal meaning of the word is “as-
     sembling, coming together.”
Karkh (karkh). The name given to a section of Baghdad on the west side
     of the Tigris River.
Kathīb, Sand Hill (kathīb, sandy hill). As with many other such words,
     al-­kathīb could be rendered as a common noun (the sandy hill) or a
     place-­name (Sand Hill).
Khawárnaq (khawarnaq). See Aqūq.
Láʿlaʿ or Láʿlaʿi (laʿlaʿ). Stone-­Flash, one of many toponyms built upon
     natural features, along the lines of American place-­names such as
     Flint-­Rock, Rock-­Creek, or Flint-­Creek.
Láyla (laylā). The beloved in the poetry attributed to Qays ibn Mulawwiḥ,
     the Bedouin poet said to have lived at or shortly after the time of the
     prophet Muḥammad. In the poems attributed to him, and in the ro-
     mances about him (in Arabic, Persian, Ottoman, and other languag-
     es), Qays is said to have gone mad and ultimately perished for love of
     Laylā. He became known as Majnūn Laylā (Mad for Laylā). The epi-
     thet majnūn (mad) also carried the etymological sense of “jinned,”
     that is, possessed by the jinn (genies). The ghazals attributed to
     Majnūn, which address his beloved Laylā, were gathered into the
     Great Book of Songs along with tales of their star-­crossed romance.
Lote, lote tree (ḍāl). A tree steeped in Arabian mythopoesis. It is associ-
     ated with the times spent with the beloved and with a similar tree
     mentioned in the Qur’an as al-­sidr (sidr al-­muntahā), the sidr of the
     furthest boundary, that was associated with Muḥammad’s prophetic
     vision (Q 53:14) and, through hadith traditions, with the highest
     reach of the heavens. The sidr (Zisiphus lotus) is most often trans-
     lated as “lote tree.” Zisiphus lotus is also said to have been the baleful


                                                                 Glossary 305
    tree of the Island of the Lotus Eaters in the Odyssey, but neither the
    Qur’anic sidr nor the ḍāl of classical nasibs bore fruit with narcotic-­
    like properties. It has also been translated as Christ-­thorn tree
    (though the Qur’an has no discussion of Jesus’s crown of thorns).
    Preservationist web pages from the Arabian peninsula feature pic-
    tures of the tree, often in praise of its medicinal properties. Botanical
    specialists have suggested that it corresponds to a particularly strik-
    ing species of acacia with yellow puff flowers native to the Red Sea
    regions, acacia vechellia seyal (ṭalḥ).
Maʾzimáyn (al-­maʾzimān, in the nominative form). An area near Mecca,
    between ʿArafa and Muzdalifa, at the boundary of the sanctuary area
    around Mecca and its immediate environs.
Markh (markh, leptadenia pyrotechnica, broom brush). A desert shrub
    that, as the name suggests, was valued for its use as kindling.
Máyya (mayya). The beloved in the poems of Ghaylān Ibn ʿUqba, d. ca.
    735 ce, also known as Dhū al-­Rumma, who flourished in the Umayy-
    ad period and whose poetry may have served as a model for Ibn
    ʿArabī’s more classically elegiac poems.
Medina, Sweet Medina (madīna, ṭayba, yathrib). The site of Islam’s first
    polity and of the home and grave of the prophet Muḥammad.
Mína (minā). The station of the hajj where pilgrims cast stones at three
    cairns (more recently large concrete pillars) representing evil ten-
    dencies or Satan; and where sheep, goats, or camels are sacrificed in
    memory of Abraham’s offering, made in place of his son. The ritual is
    carried out on the day known as the Holy Day or Eid of the Sacrifice
    (ʿĪd al-­Aḍḥā).
Moringa (bān, moringa peregrina). A tree native to the Red Sea and
    Arabian regions. It has wispy boughs and fragrant flowers that were
    visually striking within the Arabian steppe and dunescape. It was as-
    sociated with the beauty of the beloved as well as times spent with
    the beloved in its shade.
Najd (najd). The highland plateau of north-­central Arabia. It is associ-
    ated with the world of love poetry, Majnūn Laylā, and the vivifying
    Eastwind. Najd is frequently contrasted to Tihāma, the lowland area
    that extends from Mecca or nearby Jidda southward along the Red
    Sea toward Yemen.
Nāmūs (nāmūs). The word can refer to a great spirit and is thought to
    be etymologically related to the Greek nomos. In Arabic Christian


306 Glossary
     traditions it refers to the spirit that descended upon the disciples
     at Pentecost. Although the term does not occur in the Qur’an, in
     Islamic traditions it was associated with the Qur’anic holy spirit (al-­
     rūḥ al-­qudus).
Náqa (naqā, white sands). The name of a site or sites in the Arabian pen-
     insula that appears in nasib poetry as a station on the beloved’s jour-
     ney.
Násir (nāṣir). Abbasid caliph Nāṣir li-­Dīn Allāh, who ruled in Baghdad
     from 1180 to 1225 ce.
Pebble-­Ground (muḥaṣṣab). The area around Muzdalifa where hajj pil-
     grims collect the pebbles to cast later in Minā.
Persica (arāk, arāka, salvadora persica). A small tree or shrub with a
     fragrant scent and small, reddish berries that are edible. The plant
     appears in the Tarjumān along with the moringa as a marker of beau-
     ty, lushness, and longing. Its root was used as a natural toothbrush
     (miswak) by the prophet Muḥammad, and such tooth twigs are still
     sold in souks today.
Râma (rāma). The name of a site or sites in Arabia, one of which was
     a way station on the pilgrimage road between Medina and al-­Ḥīra.
     The word can be etymologically associated with the Arabic word for
     “seeking.”
Sadīr (sadīr). See Aqūq.
Salʿ or Splitrock (salʿ). A mountain near Dhū al-­Khulayfa overlooking
     Medina.
Sámiri (al-­sāmirī). A character who plays a key role in the Qur’anic ac-
     count of the Israelites and the golden calf by casting dust from the
     footprint of the messenger (spirit or Jibrīl in Ibn ʿArabī’s interpreta-
     tion) onto the calf, making it low.
Sindād (sindād). See Aqūq.
Splitrock (salʿ). A mountain overlooking Medina.
Sulaymān (sulaymān, Solomon). See Bilqīs.
Tamarisk (uthayl, a diminutive form of athl). The plural, uthaylāt, is
     translated here as “Tamarisk Stand.”
Ṭáyba (ṭayba). An epithet for Medina that means “sweet place.”
Tháhmad (thahmad). A settlement in central Arabia made famous by a
     verse from the nasib of the pre-­Islamic poet Ṭarafa’s muʿallaqa or
     “hanging ode.”
Tiháma (tihāma). See Najd.


                                                               Glossary 307
ʿUdháyb (ʿudhayb). A site known for its abundance of fresh water and
    verdant surroundings. Ibn Jubayr mentions a verdant site by that
    name just southwest of the city of al-­Ḥīra in Iraq on the pilgrimage
    route to the holy cities of Arabia.
Yalámlam (yalamlam). A site south of Mecca valued for its sweet waters.
    The sight became one of the four designated entry points (muqīts)
    for the hajj. There, pilgrims undertake the actions required to place
    them in a ritually pure state, such as dressing in white tunics and cut-
    ting their hair and nails.
Wādilaqīq (wādī al-­ʿaqīq). There were several Arabian wadis known by
    this name, one of them located in or near the oasis city of Medina. By
    the time of Ibn ʿArabī, the toponym Wādī al-­ʿAqīq had come to rep-
    resent, in poetry especially, the lost homeland and past happiness.
Wajrā (wajrā). A site associated with gazelles, lush vegetation, and times
    spent with the beloved—as in the nasib of the celebrated muʿallaqa
    of the poet Labīd.
Zámzam (zamzam). The spring near the Kaʿba, which tradition holds was
    opened by God in response to Hagar’s desperate search for water.
Zarūd (zarūd). A way station on the pilgrimage road from Iraq to Mecca,
    which is located between prongs of the desert extending south of
    the dunescape of ʿĀlij. Unlike many of the sites mentioned in the
    Tarjumān, Zarūd can be found—with its ancient name intact—on
    the present-­day map of Saudi Arabia.




308 Glossary
Notes


Translator’s Introduction
1. His fuller name parses his heritage: Muḥyī al-­Dīn abū ʿAbdullāh
   Muḥammad bin ʿAlī bin Muḥammad bin ʿAlī al-­Ṭā’ī al-­ʿArabī al-­
   Ḥātimī al-­Mursī al-­Andalūsī. Muḥyī al-­Dīn (“Reviver of the Faith”)
   is his honorific. Such honorifics were taken by Abbasid caliphs and
   other rulers, and, by the twelfth century, by prominent or aspiring
   individuals, such as poets, philosophers, theologians, soldiers, and
   scribes. Other attributes bestowed upon Ibn ʿArabī include al-­Shaykh
   al-­Akbar (the equivalent to “doctor maximus” in the western Chris-
   tian tradition) and al-­Kibrīt al-­Aḥmar (Red Sulfur), the name for the
   key element in the alchemical transformation of base metals into
   gold. Muḥammad is his given name, the equivalent of the first name
   in modern Western societies. Ibn ʿAlī bin Muḥammad bin ʿAlī (son
   of ʿAlī, the son of Muḥammad, the son of ʿAlī) is his patronymic. Al-­
   ʿArabī reflects his patrilineal descent back to the Arabian peninsula
   at the time of the prophet Muḥammad. Al-­Ṭā’ī is a tribal designation,
   “of the tribe of Ṭayyiʾ,” a tribe of pre-­and early Islamic Yemen, ele-
   ments of which migrated throughout the Arabian peninsula and be-
   yond. Its most renowned member, Ḥātim al-­Ṭā’ī, lived at the time of
   the Prophet and became a paradigm for truthfulness and eloquence
   in later literature. Ibn ʿArabī traced his patrilineal descent back di-
   rectly to Ḥātim, and Ibn ʿArabī’s poet-­persona in the Tarjumān re-
   fers to himself as a scion of Yemen. Al-­Mursī (the Murcian) and al-­
   Andalusī (the Andalusian) are toponymics indicating the city and
   region in which he was born. Ibn ʿArabī, alternatively Ibn al-­ʿArabī, is
   his popular name. In the Tarjumān the poet-­persona identifies him-
   self as pure Arab in contrast to the pure Persian descent of his be-
   loved, a contrast that the poet shapes as West and East. The choice of
   what to call him—Ibn ʿArabī or Ibn al-­ʿArabī—has generated a legacy
   of controversy and discussion. In his vast political and literary his-
   tory of al-­Andalus, al-­Maqqarī (d. 1632) writes that the longer form
   Ibn al-­ʿArabī was common in the Maghrib (the western areas that in-
   cluded al-­Andalus as well as present-­day Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia,
   and the northern parts of West Africa), while Ibn ʿArabī became the


                                                                Notes 309
   preferred form in the Arab East. Shihāb al-­Dīn al-­Maqqarī, Nafh al-­
   Ṭīb, 8 vols., edited by Iḥsan ʿAbbās (Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1968), 2:175.
   In the print era, editions and translations of Ibn ʿArabī’s works and
   works about him vary between the two designations, and that split
   is now deeply embedded in the bibliographical materials. It also con-
   tinues to generate earnest debates over which version of the name is
   correct.
2. Ibn ʿArabī, Tāj al-­rasāʾil wa-­minhāj al-­wasāʾil [The Diadem of Epis-
   tles and the Way of Intercessions]. This work has not been translated
   in full. For a discussion of the work, with translations of some pas-
   sages, see Denis Gril, “Love Letters to the Kaʿba: A Presentation of
   Ibn ʿArabī’s Tâj al-­rasâʾil,” JMIAS 17 (1995): 40–54.
3. Ibn al-­ʿArabī, Kitāb muḥāḍarat al-­abrār wa-­musāmarat al-­akhyār fī
   al-­adībāt wa-­al-­nawādir wa-­al-­aḥbār (Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1968). This
   major work of Ibn ʿArabī has not been translated. The full title might
   be rendered as “The Book of the Sessions of the Righteous and the
   Salons of the Select with Attention to the Literary Arts, Curious
   Tales, and Historical Reports.” See the “Notes on the Poems” con-
   cerning poems 1, 3, 20, 27, 29, and 55, which indicate the impact,
   sometimes profound, of Sessions of the Righteous for any assessment
   of Ibn ʿArabī’s comments on and recollections of these poems.
4. For a critical edition of Meccan Openings (al-­Futuḥat al-­Makkiyya),
   see al-­Futūḥāt al-­makkīyah li-­Muḥyī al-­Dīn Ibn al-­ʻArabī, 12 vols, ed-
   ited by ʿAbd al-­ʿAzīz Sulṭān al-­Manṣūb (Sanaʿ, Yemen: al-­Jumhūrīya
   al-­Yamanīya, Wizārat al-­Thaqāfa, 2010), hereafter referred to as Fut.
   For a translation of the “Treatise on Love” within that work (ch.
   178 of Meccan Openings), see Ibn al-­ʿArabī, Traité de l’amour, trans.
   Maurice Gloton (Paris: A. Michel, 1986). For the Arabic text of the
   “Treatise of Love” (Fī maʿrifa maqām al-­maḥabba: “On Connais-
   sance of Station of Love”), see Meccan Openings (Fut. 5:582–624).
   For a translation of chapter 1, which depicts Ibn ʿArabī’s encounter
   with the mystical youth at the Kaʿba, see Ibn al-­ʿArabī, The Youth: The
   Figurative Made Literal, book 1, trans. Eric Winkel (Self-­published,
   2016). Chapter 72 revisits the hajj and Kaʿba themes: see Ibn al-­ʿArabī
   on the Mysteries of the Pilgrimage: The Futūhāt al-­Makkiyya, trans.
   Aisha Bewley (Chicago: Kazi, 2009). For translations of Fuṣūṣ al-­
   Ḥikam, see Ibn al-­ʿArabī, The Ringstones of Wisdom, trans. Caner K.
   Dagli (Chicago: Kazi, 2004), and Ibn al-­ʿArabī, The Bezels of Wisdom,


310 Notes
   trans. R. W. J. Austin (New York: Paulist Press, 1980). (In Ibn ʿArabī’s
   thought, the ringstone and its setting or bezel are molded on each
   other like the heart of the mystic and the manifestation of the divine
   manifestation, and are, in terms of form, one. The complexity of the
   theme in Fuṣūṣ al-­Ḥikam has resulted in differing translations for the
   title of the work.)
5. Approximately half of Ibn ʿArabī’s Great Dīwān was published in
   Cairo in the nineteenth century and is known as the Būlāq Dīwān
   after the publishing house that produced it. Only in the past two de-
   cades have scholars rediscovered what appears to be a copy of Dīwān
   al-­Maʿārif in a Parisian manuscript collection. Dīwān al-­Māʿārif con-
   tains more than a thousand of Ibn ʿArabī’s poetic compositions, most
   of which are in the mode of nasib and ghazal. All the Tarjumān poems
   as well as Ibn ʿArabī’s commentary on poems 1–13 and the first part
   of 14 are included at the end of that work. A full evaluation of Ibn
   ʿArabī’s poetic oeuvre will require more time, but the basic genres,
   purposes, and styles within his greater Dīwān are beginning to
   emerge more clearly. One type of poem, which occurs most impres-
   sively in Ringstones of Wisdom and Meccan Openings, might be called
   gnomic. It offers a set of verses (often between eight and twenty in
   length) that combine ghazal and nasib with riddles, puns, and intima-
   tions of cosmological, ontological, and mystical insights. Such poems
   often appear at the beginning of a chapter or section. The body of the
   chapter serves as an unpacking of the poem, a reading of the poem,
   and a translation of the poem into a different mode of discourse, not
   without warnings that the meaning of the poem cannot be grasped
   through explication alone. In such poems, love and mystical connais-
   sance (shawq and maʿrifa) are inextricably intertwined. Denis McAu-
   ley, in Ibn ʿArabī’s Mystical Poetics (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
   2012), has explored several genres of poems in the Bulāq Dīwān: (a)
   poems dedicated to chapters of the Qur’an; (b) response poems in
   which the poet quotes an earlier poet and composes his own poem
   that both honors the earlier poem and rivals it; (c) poems, all in the
   same meter and rhyme, centered on the divine self-­manifestation;
   (d) a set of “ultra-­rhyme” poems in which every verse ends with
   Allah; and (e) poems in the muʿāsharāt genre, ten-­line poems in
   which “each poem represents one letter of the alphabet, each verse
   of the poem in question beginning and ending with that letter,” and


                                                                Notes 311
   in which “Ibn ʿArabī portrays himself as participating in the divine
   command that moves the heavenly spheres” (McAuley, Mystical
   Poetics, 12). Ibn ʿArabī was also a pioneer of the Sufi garland poem
   (muwashshaḥa), which was perfected by his younger contemporary
   Abū al-­Hasan al-­Shushtarī. For a trilingual Arabic–Castilian–English
   edition and discussion of the garland poems of Ibn ʿArabī, see Fed-
   erico Corriente and Ed Emery, Twenty-­Seven Muwashshahaat and
   One Zajal by Ibn al-­ʿArabī of Murcia (1165–1240) (London and Zara-
   goza: School of Oriental and African Studies). The French scholar
   and Ibn ʿArabī biographer Claude Addas called attention to the Paris
   manuscript of Dīwān al-­Maʿārif, discussed Ibn ʿArabī’s introduction
   to that work, and challenged the common assumption that Ibn ʿArabī
   was more of a thinker than a poet. Julian Cook and Stephen Hirten-
   stein have put forth a reconstruction of Ibn ʿArabī’s poetic oeuvre in
   light of the rediscovery of Dīwān al-­Maʿārif. See Claude Addas, “A
   propos du dīwān al-­maʿārif d’Ibn ʿArabî,” Studia Islamica 81 ( Janu-
   ary 1995): 187–95, https://doi.org/10.2307/1596025; idem, “Ship
   of Stone,” in Journey of the Heart, edited by Johnny Mercer (Oxford:
   Muhyiddin Ibn ʿArabī Society, 1996): 5–24; idem, “L’œuvre poétique
   d’Ibn ʿArabî et sa réception,” Studia Islamica 91 ( January 2000):
   23–38, https://doi.org/10.2307/1596267; Julian Cook and Stephen
   Hirtenstein, “The Great Dīwān and Its Offspring,” JMIAS 52 (2012):
   33–91. More recently, Moroccan researcher Abdelillah Benarafa has
   published the detailed study on Dīwān al-­Maʿārif, “Al-­Shiʿr al-­ʿirfānī,
   dirāsa wa taḥqīq fī ‘Dīwān al-­maʿārif ’ in Al-­ʿAwda ilā al-­matn al-­
   akbārī,” edited by Rizqī bin ʿAwmar and ʿAbd al-­Qādir Bilgīth (Da-
   mascus: Dār Ninawa, 2018), 83–138. Benarafa’s study indicates that
   an edition of Dīwān al-­Maʿārif is in the works.
6. For the life, travels, and writings of Ibn ʿArabī, see the biography of
   the Murcian shaykh by Claude Addas, Quest for the Red Sulphur: The
   Life of Ibn ʿArabī, trans. Peter Kingsley (Cambridge: Islamic Texts
   Society, 1993). Addas had published an earlier edition in French, Ibn
   ʿArabī, ou La quête du soufre rouge (Paris: Gallimard, 1989), but the
   1993 edition has been expanded considerably. The other major biog-
   raphy in English is by Stephen Hirtenstein, The Unlimited Mercifier:
   The Spiritual Life and Thought of Ibn ʿArabī (Oxford: Anqa, 1999),
   which includes a vividly related and carefully sourced narrative of the
   shaykh’s life interspersed with meditations on his mystical teachings


312 Notes
    and experiences. More recently, the Syrian scholar Muḥammad ʿAlī
    Ḥājj Yūsuf has offered a detailed biography in Arabic: Shams al-­
    maghrib [The Sun of the West]: Sīrat al-­shaykh al-­akbar Muḥyī al-­
    Dīn Ibn al-­ʿArabī wa-­madhhabihi (Aleppo: Fuṣṣilat li-­l-­Dirāsāt wa-­
    al-­Tarjama wa-­al-­Nashr, 2006). On contentions over Ibn ʿArabī in the
    centuries following his death, see Alexander D. Knysh, Ibn ʿArabī in
    the Later Islamic Tradition: The Making of a Polemical Image in Medi-
    eval Islam (Albany: SUNY Press, 1999).
 7. Although some manuscripts vocalize the poetry or at least add vocal-
    ization where a word could be read in more than one way, authors,
    copyists, and publishers rarely vocalize prose, and the manuscripts
    of Tarjumān al-­ashwāq do not vocalize the title. In what follows I will
    refer to the collection of poetry translated and discussed here simply
    as “the Tarjumān.”
 8. For an in-­depth study of the nasib, see Jaroslav Stetkevych, The Zephyrs
    of Najd: The Poetics of Nostalgia in the Classical Arabic Nasib (Bloom-
    ington: Indiana University Press, 1993). Although Stetkevych, who
    expresses irritation with Ibn ʿArabī’s commentary, shows little inter-
    est in the Tarjumān itself, his study illuminates the depth, range, and
    sensibility of the nasib tradition that informs and animates it.
 9. Some urban poets, most famously Abū Nuwās (d. 814), instead of
    adapting the aṭlāl theme to the urban environment, parodied it along
    with the Bedouin cultures that they reflected originally. Yet this par-
    ody did not always entail a rejection of the nasib: indeed, only a poet
    who has interiorized the motifs and mastered its full range of possi-
    bilities would be able to parody it so artfully. In one of Abū Nuwās’s
    most exquisite poems, the poet-­lover-­urbanite aficionado of the
    good life and debauchery finds that at the end of his drunken revelry,
    the singing girls strike up a verse with nasib sentiment and the eyes
    of his poet and his fellow drinkers grow misty.
10. A few of the poems in the Tarjumān reflect the style of garland po-
    etry, albeit within a classical metrical and end-­rhyme format rather
    than stanzaic. The first part of poem 25 and the first part of poem 46
    are cases in point.
11. Although the Arabic word ghazal is shared by the various traditions,
    American poets and readers have had their understanding shaped by
    the formally very different Persian poetry composed by the likes of
    Rumi and Hafez, Ottoman poets such as Naʾili (d. 1666), and Urdu


                                                                 Notes 313
    poets including Ghalib (d. 1869) and Iqbal (d. 1877). Recent Ameri-
    can engagement with non-­Arabic ghazal traditions has been robust.
    Examples include: Angels Knocking on the Tavern Door: Thirty Poems
    by Hafez, trans. Robert Bly and Leonard Lewison (Harper Peren-
    nial, 1989); Ghazals of Ghalib: Versions from Urdu, Mirza Asadullah
    Khan Ghalib, Aijaz Ahmad (editor), W. S. Merwin (contributor),
    Adrienne Rich (contributor), William Stafford (contributor), David
    Ray (contributor), Thomas Fitzsimmons (contributor), Mark Strand
    (contributor), William Hunt (contributor) (Oxford University Press
    India, 1994); and Robin Magowan, The Garden of Amazement: Scat-
    tered Gems after Saeb (West Brattleboro, VT: Longhouse, 2015). For
    several years, Coleman Barks’s Rumi translations topped the Ameri-
    can best-­seller lists for poetry, and they remain immensely popular.
12. It was Ibn ʿArabī along with his contemporary, the Cairene poet Ibn
    al-­Fāriḍ (d. 1235), who became most known for integrating the sites
    of the pilgrimage into the Arabian love poem. Sessions of the Righ-
    teous offers critical new insight not only on the poets that shaped Ibn
    ʿArabī’s poetics of love most strongly, but also on prior developments
    in integrating the world of the pilgrimage into love poetry. Composi-
    tions by two poets, Sharīf al-­Raḍī and Mihyār al-­Daylamī—both of
    whom were major Shiʿite leaders in Baghdad and both of whom were
    in charge of the largest annual pilgrimage caravan to Mecca—domi-
    nate the poems cited by Ibn ʿArabī in Sessions. The quotations of their
    poems in Sessions open a window into the poetic imagination that
    grew up around the hajj in the years prior to Ibn al-­Fāriḍ and Ibn
    ʿArabī. The following verses from Mihyār al-­Daylamī, which make up
    just one of dozens of examples in Sessions, center on three of the most
    prominent stations of the beloved within the Tarjumān, Hājir, Himā,
    and Laʿlaʿ:

                                                      ِ ‫ي ـ ــا لَ ـ ـيـ ـ ـلَ ـ ـ ِـي ِبـ ـ ـ‬
                                             ‫ـاج ـ ـ ـ ٍر‬    َ               ْ َ
                    ‫ـاض فَـ ْـار َجــعِــى‬
                                       ٍ ‫ـاد َم ـ‬ َ َ  ‫ـ‬ ‫ع‬    ‫ن‬ْ ِ
                                                                 ‫إ‬    

                                                                                               ْ ‫ض ـ ــى بِ ـأ‬
                                                                       ‫َخ ــبَــا ِر ٱل ـ ِريَــا‬            َ ‫أ َْر‬
                                                         ِ
                    ‫   ح َوٱلْ ـ ـ ـ ـب ـُ ـ ـ ـ ُـروق ٱلْ ـ ـلُـ ـ َـم ـ ـ ِع‬               ِ
                                                                       ‫ٱلِ َمى‬     ْ ‫َوأَيْـ َـن ِمـ ْـن ب ـَ ْـرِق‬
                    ‫   شـ ـ ـ ــائِـ ـ ـ ـ َـم ـ ـ ـ ـةٌ بِـ ـ ـ ـلَ ـ ـ ـ ْـعـ ـ ـ ـلَـ ـ ـ ـ ِع‬
                                                                                             َ

314 Notes
                O night that I passed in Hājir,
                  if the past can return, return
                I content myself with reports
                   from the wind and lightning shimmers
                But where in the flash over Himā
                  is a sign for Laʿlaʿi?
                                  (Sessions of the Righteous
                                              [MAb 1:191])
        The third major contributor to the Sessions imaginary was the
    Ḥanbalite preacher and author of Baghdad, Abū al-­Faraj ibn al-­Jawzī
    (d. 1201), two of whose works Ibn ʿArabī cites. Of special importance
    to the merging of pilgrimage and the lover’s quest was Ibn al-­Jawzī’s
    work The Awakener of Dormant Passion for the Noblest Places (Muthīr
    al-­gharām al-­sākin ilā ashraf al-­amākin). In it, Ibn al-­Jawzī uses the
    full resources of the erotic poetic tradition to reflect and intensify the
    longing on the part of Muslims to make the hajj and, for those who
    have made the hajj, to return to Mecca and its environment after they
    have returned home from their pilgrimage.
13. Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism (Princeton: Princeton Univer-
    sity Press, 1957): 249–50. Jonathan Culler integrates Frye’s remark
    into his analysis of the “embarrassment of apostrophe” within post-­
    Romantic poetics. See The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, De-
    construction (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1981): 135–54.
    He also notes Geoffrey Hartmann’s discussion of the almost-­always
    vocative and optative nature of William Blake’s poems to the seasons
    and the ritual character of whatever descriptive element there is. See
    Culler, Pursuit, 139; Geoffrey Hartman, Beyond Formalism (New Ha-
    ven: Yale University Press, 1959), 193. For a related study, with less
    focus on the Romantics and apostrophes to nonhuman addressees,
    see William Water, Poetry’s Touch: On Lyric Address (Ithaca, NY:
    Cornell University Press, 2003).
14. For the poetic feature of turning in Ibn ʿArabī ’s contemporary, Ibn
    al-­Fāriḍ, see ʿAbbās Yūsuf Ḥaddād, al-­Anā fī al-­shiʿr al-­Ṣūfī: Ibn al-­
    Fāriḍ unmūdhajan [The “I” in Sufi Poetry: the Case of Ibn al-­Fāriḍ]
    (al-­Lādhiqīyah, Syria: Dār al-­Ḥiwār, 2005), 163–76.
15. For one example, see Henry Corbin, Creative Imagination in the


                                                                   Notes 315
    Ṣūfism of Ibn ʿArabī, translated by Ralph Manheim (Princeton Uni-
    versity Press, 1969), 138–39.
16. Wolfgang Hermann offers a promising suggestion regarding Niẓām
    and Qurrat al-­ʿAyn: if Niẓām was the daughter of the scholar from
    Isfahān by a Christian wife, then although she was raised as a mem-
    ber of the family and offered the highest educational possibilities,
    she would still have been, in legal terms, a jāriya and a daughter of
    the Christian Rūm. See Muḥyiddīn Ibn ʿArabī, Deuter der Sehnsüchte
    (Turjuman al-­Ashwaq), 2 vols., trans. Wolfgang Hermann (Zürich:
    Edition Shershir, 2013–16), 1:11–13.
17. Classical Arabic poetry redounds with words for “young women,”
    who were, by societal definition, unmarried. Many of the terms indi-
    cate that the woman was a virgin. Others were less specific. As with
    the Hebrew word almah, ambiguity in this regard could lead to dif-
    ferent interpretations—most famously with the millennia-­old debate
    between Jewish and Christian exegetes around the almah that Isa-
    iah predicted would bring forth a messiah. Christian exegetes read
    the word as indicating a young virgin woman (a prefiguration of the
    Blessed Virgin), and Jewish exegetes insisted that the word did not
    refer specifically to a virgin—only to a young woman. Ibn ʿArabī re-
    ferred to the young woman who confronted him at the Kaʿba as a
    jāriya, a word with a semantic ambivalence most comparable to the
    English maid/maiden/maidservant/handmaiden. The word jāriya
    denoted a young woman slave, and in that role many would have been
    household servants. Yet their role was by no means limited to such
    humble circumstances. Educated and artistically talented jāriyas be-
    came central actors within elite culture as masters of the poetic and
    musical repertoire. Some became the equivalent of modern “divas,”
    with large and passionate circles of followers, particularly within ur-
    ban circles and in the courts of rulers. In addition to taking the role of
    famous vocalists, lute-­players, musical arrangers, and poets in their
    own right, jāriyas took on another distinctive role—that of the pious
    jāriya savant. Such jāriya-­savants had become a feature in Sufi ac-
    counts of earlier saints or “friends of God.” The most famous, Rābiʿa
    al-­ʿAdawiyya of Baghdad (lived ca. 800), features in numerous such
    stories, upbraiding and instructing the great Sufi masters of her time.
    One particularly renowned Rābiʿa story, which is featured in The
    Lives of the Saints by Ibn ʿArabī’s contemporary Farīd al-­Dīn ʿAṭṭār,


316 Notes
    depicts the Kaʿba itself going out to meet Rābiʿa during her pilgrim-
    age, even as the great Sufi sage of the time is left standing, stunned,
    where the Kaʿba would normally be. Farīd al-­Dīn ʿAṭṭār’s Memorial of
    God’s Friends, translated and introduced by Paul Losensky (NY: Pau-
    list Press Classics of Western Spirituality, 2009), 100–102. In Sessions
    of the Righteous, Ibn ʿArabī transmitted several accounts of jāriya
    divas, but he also included accounts of jāriya savants at the Kaʿba,
    encountering, humbling, and instructing great Sufi masters such
    as Junayd (d. 910). Some of these accounts bear striking similarity
    to the story of his encounter with Qurrat al-­ʿAyn, which he also in-
    cluded in Sessions. For the accounts of jāriya savants and jāriya divas,
    see Sessions of the Righteous: MAb 1:199–204; 1:222–29 which also
    includes the story of a master female poet who is also a freewoman
    and therefore (in accordance with the norms of the time) recites her
    erotic verses from behind a curtain; 1:317–18; 1:338; 1:348 (on a
    Rūmī princess-­savant and the Kaʿba); 1:389. Of particular relevance
    to the Tarjumān prefaces is the story of Ibn ʿArabī’s encounter at the
    Ka`ba with a voice that shouted out and proceeded to interrogate
    him on the subject of love and mysticism: Sessions of the Righteous
    (MAb 1:255–57). For Ibn ʿArabī’s encounter with Qurrat al-­ʿAyn at
    the Kaʿba, see Sessions of the Righteous (MAb 2:255–59). Some jāriya
    savant accounts retold by Ibn ʿArabī appeared in an earlier work by
    Ibn al-­Jawzī, Safat al-­Safwā (The Select of the Pure). Ibn ʿArabī men-
    tions that work explicitly in the introduction to Sessions of the Righ-
    teous, though he also notes his reception of these stories through oral
    transmission, and he often cites at least the last transmitter in the
    isnād by name.
18. In the Tarjumān and Ibn ʿArabī’s own autobiographical prefaces and
    commentary, as well as his remarks on the Tarjumān poems in Ses-
    sions of the Righteous, we can see an Islamicate myth unfolding before
    our eyes. By “myth,” I do not mean a story that is false but one that is
    more than true in purely biographical or historically verifiable terms,
    and that in literary and imaginative power extends beyond the range
    of mere facticity.
19. Priceless Treasures: A Commentary on Tarjumān al-­Ashwāq. Its full
    title within the manuscript traditions is Al-­Dhakhā’ir wa al-­aʿlāq fī
    sharḥ tarjumān al-­ashwāq, but late nineteenth-­and early twentieth-­
    century printed editions changed the title from Al-­Dhakhā’ir wa


                                                                Notes 317
    al-­aʿlāq (literally, “Precious Items and Lockets”) to Dhakhā’ir al-­
    aʿlāq (“Precious Items of the Lockets”), which became the de facto
    title in the years that followed.
20. “My commentary on these verses was prompted by the request of
    my dear companions, Badr al-­Ḥabashī and Ibn Sawdakīn. They had
    heard a jurist in the city of Aleppo denying that these verses ex-
    pressed lordly secrets and divine inspirations, claiming instead that
    the shaykh who composed them wished to veil their intent out of
    concern for his reputation as a man of religion and righteousness.
    I authorized a commentary, and the judge Ibn ʿAdīm read it before
    an assembly of jurists. When my critic heard it, he repented and
    renounced casting aspersions upon the verse of ghazal and tashbīb
    composed by Sufis and the divine secrets expressed in them.” See the
    Shuqayrī edition of Priceless Treasures: Dīwān dhakhā’ir al-­aʿlāq, ed-
    ited by Muḥammad ʿAlam al-­Dīn al-­Shuqayrī (al-­Haram [Egypt]: al-­
    ʿAyn lil-­Dirāsāt wa-­al-­Buḥūth al-­Insāniyya wa-­al-­Ijtimāʿiyya, 1995),
    175–76. The manuscript traditions vary in the placement of these
    remarks. Some attach them to the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface, some place
    them at the beginning of the commentary, some attach them to the
    end of the commentary (appendix 2).
21. For the possibility that Raymond Llull may have played a role in
    popularizing themes of Sufi love poetry and Sufi commentary in
    fifteenth-­century Spain, see Luce López Baralt, San Juan de La Cruz
    y El Islam (Mexico City: El Colegio de México, 1985): 369–77. For a
    close comparison between a poem by John of the Cross and poem
    30 of the Tarjumān, see Georg Bossong, “Sprache, Mystik, Intertex-
    tualität bei Ibn ʿArabī und San Juan de la Cruz,” in Katherina Maier
    Troxler and Constantino Maider, eds., Fictio Poetica: Studi italiani i
    ispanici in onore di Georges Güntert (Florence: Franco Cesati, 1998):
    141–67. For a recent close study of John’s poetry and commentar-
    ies, see Bernard McGinn, The Presence of God: A History of Christian
    Mysticism, vol. 6, part 2: Mysticism in the Golden Age of Spain (1500–
    1650) (New York: Crossroads, 2017): 230–45.
22. The saying, known as “the hadith of supererogatory devotions”
    (ḥadīth al-­nawāfil), is well attested in such classical hadith compi-
    lations as Saḥīḥ al-­Bukhārī. For sources for the hadith, see William
    Graham, Divine Word and Prophetic Word in Early Islam (Paris:
    Mouton, 1977), 173–74. Ibn ʿArabī included the hadith in his own


318 Notes
    collection of divine sayings, which he collected from the religious
    scholars of his time through personal chains of oral transmission.
    See Divine Sayings: The Mishkāt al-­Anwār of Ibn ʿArabī, Arabic text
    and English translation by Stephen Hirtenstein and Martin Notcutt
    (Oxford: Anqa, 2004), p. 88 (translation); p. 51 (Arabic text). For a
    contextualization of this and other key hadiths in the writings of Ibn
    ʿArabī, see James Morris, The Reflective Heart: Discovering Spiritual
    Intelligence in Ibn ʿArabī’s Meccan Illuminations (Louisville, KY: Fons
    Vitae, 2005), 163–78.
23. For a discussion of the complete human being and the mirror im-
    age in the mystical thought of Ibn ʿArabī, see Michael Sells, Mystical
    Languages of Unsaying (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994),
    chapter 4 (“Identity Shift and Meaning Event”), 63–89.
24. For a biography of Ibn al-­Fāriḍ, see Th. Emil Homerin, From Arab
    Poet to Muslim Saint: Ibn Al-­Fāriḍ, His Verse, and His Shrine (Colum-
    bia: University of South Carolina Press, 1994).
25. A critical study of the Tarjumān’s poetry can be found in Sulaymān
    ʿAṭṭār, Al-­Khayāl wa-­al-­shiʿr fī taṣawwuf al-­Andalus: Ibn ʿArabī, Abū
    al-­Ḥasan al-­Shūshtarī, wa-­Ibn Khamīs al-­Tilimsānī (Cairo: Dār al-­
    Maʻārif, 1981).
26. The meters employed in the Tarjumān are, by order of frequency:
    Ṭawīl (19), Kāmil (11), Basīṭ (9), Mutaqārib (6), Ramal (6), Rajaz (5),
    Khafīf (3), Wāfir (2), Sarīʿ (1). The meter-­poem match is as follows:
      Ṭawīl	3, 4, 7, 11, 12, 14, 21, 32, 35, 36, 38, 43, 50, 51, 52,
                 53, 55, 57, 58
      Kāmil	8, 9, 13, 18, 22, 24, 26, 27, 29, 34, 56
      Basīṭ	2, 6, 10, 17, 39, 46, 49, 60
      Mutaqārib	16, 23, 31, 41, 54, 59
      Ramal	1, 5, 15, 30, 37, 42
      Rajaz	19, 25, 28, 45, 48
      Khafīf	20, 40, 44
      Wāfir	33, 61
      Sarīʿ	47
       Poem 30 has also been ascribed the closely related Madīd meter,
   and poem 61 to the Hazaj meter. See, for example, Dīwān Dhakhāʾir
   al-­Aʿlāq (Priceless Treasures), edited by Muḥammad ʿAlam al-­Dīn
   al-­Shuqayrī (al-­Haram [Egypt]: al-­ʿAyn lil-­Dirāsāt wa-­al-­Buḥūth


                                                                 Notes 319
    al-­Insāniyya wa-­al-­Ijtimāʿiyya, 1995), which provides the meter iden-
    tification as the beginning of each poem.
27. For a translation that attempts to re-­create the Arabic meters within
    English, see The Seven Golden Odes of Pagan Arabia Known Also as
    the Moallakat, translated from the original Arabic by Lady Anne
    Blunt, done into English verse by Wilfrid Scawen Blunt (London,
    1903).
28. For examples of the intensive use of jinās in the Tarjumān, see the
    notes to poems 4 and 42.
29. For a personal chronicle of the arduous pilgrimage journey to Mecca
    by an Andalusī acquaintance of Ibn ʿArabī, see Ibn Jubayr, The Travels
    of Ibn Jubayr: A Medieval Spanish Muslim Visits Makkah, Madinah,
    Egypt, Cities of the Middle East and Sicily, trans. Roland Broadhurst
    (New Delhi: Goodword Books, 2001). Ibn Jubayr traveled the same
    pilgrimage route from Iraq to Medina and Mecca as Ibn ʿArabī. See
    in particular his depictions of stations on the pilgrimage route men-
    tioned within the Tarjumān: page 213 on Ḥājir, 214 on Zarūd, 215 on
    al-­ʿUdhayb, and 218 on al-­Bāriq.
30. Sessions of the Righteous (MAb 2:476). The poem also appears in
    Dīwān al-­Maʿārif, though with a different introductory comment:
    “The spirit is Greek (yunānī) and the thought-­flash (al-­khāṭir) is
    Arab.” See Benarafa, “Al-­Shiʿr al-­ʿirfānī,” 116.

Appendix 1: Niẓām Preface
1. This preface begins with the kind of formal Islamic prologue that was
   standard for books and treatises. Such prologues had two parts, one
   offering praise to God and the second offering praise to the prophet
   Muḥammad. Yet such prologues were more than pious formali-
   ties. The manner in which the author praised God and the Prophet
   previewed the subject matter of the book in question. Thus, in the
   preface to the Tarjumān, Ibn ʿArabī praises God as both the beauti-
   ful and the lover of beauty, then praises the beauty of the world that
   reflects the beauty of its creator, and, finally, refers to lovers as being
   annihilated in contemplation of that beauty. The second part of the
   prologue asks blessings for Muḥammad, who manifested the beauty
   of God most perfectly, with special attention to the beauty of his ex-
   emplary life.



320 Notes
2. “Intimates”: ʿārifin (literally, those who know someone or something
    in a personal, intimate, or experiential way).
3. Ibn ʿArabī gives the fuller name of the shaykh as Makīn al-­Dīn Abū
    Shujāʿ Ẓāhir bin Rustam bin Abī al-­Rajā al-­Isbahānī.” “Isbahān” was
    a common alternative spelling for Isfahān. “God rest his soul” (the
    idiomatic English equivalent of raḥimahu allāh taʿālā). By adding this
    expression after the name, Ibn ʿArabī indicates that Makīn al-­Dīn was
    deceased at the time he composed this preface. Ibn ʿArabī repeats
    the expression a few lines later after mentioning Makīn al-­Dīn again,
    a repetition I have omitted for stylistic reasons.
4. Abū ʿIsā al-­Tirmidhī (d. 892) was the author of one of the six major
    Sunni hadith collections, al-­Jāmiʿ al-­ṣaḥīḥ. He is not to be confused
    with al-­Ḥakīm al-­Tirmidhī (d. 869), a Sufi author whose works played
    a major role in Ibn ʿArabī’s writings on saintship.
5. “Al-­balad al-­amīn” is a Qur’anic epithet for Mecca and its environs.
6. “Sun Splendor”: literally, “Essence of the Sun and Splendor” (ʿAyn
    al-­Shams wa al-­Bahā’)
7. “The scholars, worshippers, itinerants, and renunciates”: ʿālimāt,
    ʿābidāt, sāʾiḥāt, zāhidāt.
8. “Stunned into silence”: aʿjazat. This word evokes the doctrine of the
    inimitability of the Qur’an with the suggestion that Niẓām’s speech,
    like God’s word in the Qur’an, reduces to silence anyone who would
    try to imitate it.
9. Qass bin Saʿda was known as a Christian priest and orator praised by
    the prophet Muḥammad. Some of the oratorical locutions attributed
    to Ibn Saʿda show strong stylistic similarities to early Meccan suras
    of the Qur’an. Maʿn bin Zā’ida was a noted Muslim warrior during
    the Abbasid period. Samaw’al was a Jewish Arabic poet of the pre-­
    Islamic era renowned for his loyalty. Ibn ʿArabī’s choice of a Chris-
    tian, Muslim, and Jew as those exceeded by Niẓām would seem to
    echo themes in poems 2 and 11 and, as Hermann suggests (vol. 1,
    42n24), was likely intentional.
10. “In this volume”: fī hādha al-­juz’. Ibn ʿArabī may be referring here
    to the Tarjumān as “one volume” of his poetic oeuvre or “Greater
    Dīwān.”
11. “Fitting”: lāʾiq. This particular Arabic word appears here as well as in
    the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface. Here the poet defends his verses as having



                                                                Notes 321
    been expressed in a fitting manner. In the Qurrat al-­ʿAyn preface, the
    young woman concludes each of her criticisms by asking if the verse
    in question was a fitting thing for a shaykh like Ibn ʿArabī to compose.
12. “The virgin most pure”: al-­baytūl al-­aʿdhrā’. Literally, “virgin, vir-
    gin”: the second word for virgin, aʿdhrā’, is employed in the hadith
    collections to refer to the virgin Maryam, the mother of Jesus.
13. “Treasures and Lockets”: al-­dhakhā’ir wa al-­aʿlāq, the exact phrase
    that would form the title for Ibn ʿArabī’s commentary. Elsewhere I
    use the shortened form Priceless Treasures to refer to the commen-
    tary itself as a text.
14. Throughout this section of the preface, Ibn ʿArabī has referred to
    himself using a conventional, formal plural. Most translators have
    taken “our custom” to refer to the manner in which Sufis or pious
    renunciates composed, quoted, employed or interpreted amatory
    verses, but it could also be translated as “my custom” and thereby re-
    fer to Ibn ʿArabī’s own accustomed practices in regard to ghazal and
    nasib.
15. The end for us is better than the beginning: a near-­verbatim quote from
    Q 93:4, “And the end for you is better than the beginning.”
16. Q 35:14.

Appendix 2: Qurrat al-­ʿAyn Preface
1. The jāriya criticizes Ibn ʿArabī for questioning whether or not the
   loved one knew whose heart they had possessed, pointing out that
   anyone who has something knows what it is they have. The critique
   is based upon the Arabic word family ʿ/r/f, which indicates a particu-
   lar kind of knowing, a personal, experiential knowing (similar to the
   French connaître) that contrasts with ʿ/l/m, which designates a more
   objective kind of knowledge (as with the French savoir). The lover
   and mystic have knowledge (maʿrifa, ʿirfān) in this personal sense. So
   of course they know whose heart they have possessed, she explains.
   On the other hand, Ibn ʿArabī’s exclamation “Would I knew” is in-
   deed an appropriate expression of his own lack of maʿrifa.
2. “A sincere tongue”: lisānu sidqin, a Qur’anic phrase. In Q 19:50,
   the divine speaker states that he has bestowed a sincere tongue on
   Ibrāhīm, Iṣḥāq, and Yaʿqūb (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob). In Q 26:84,
   Abraham prays to be made a paradigm of sincere speech for posterity.
3. Although Ibn ʿArabī has introduced the jāriya as an exemplar of


322 Notes
   modesty, wit, and tact, she proceeds through her rebuke of each of
   the four verses with brutal frankness.
4. Ibn ʿArabī employs the word “cousin” (bint al-­khāla) as a form of po-
   lite address to a young woman who has no family ties to him.
5. “Comfort of the Eye”: qurrat al-­ʿayn. The expression could also be
   rendered “balm of the eye,” “cooling of the eye,” “solace of the eye,”
   “joy of the eye.” It conveys a combination of joy and relief that can-
   not always be reduced to one or another of the possible English ren-
   ditions. The expression or equivalents to it appear several times in
   the Qur’an. In Q 25:74, there is reference to those who pray, “lord,
   grant us wives and children who will be a comfort for our eyes.” In
   a more universal context (Q 32:17), the divine voice states that “no
   soul knows how much contentment of the eye (qurrat al-­ʿayn) is se-
   cretly stored up as a reward for what it does.” See also Q 33:51: “That
   is likely to comfort your eye, and you will grieve no more.” When the
   virgin Maryam seeks refuge from her birth pangs near a palm tree, a
   voice calls to her telling her that a spring has been opened up and the
   palm tree is bearing dates, and calls her to “eat, drink, and let your
   eye be cooled” (Q 19:26).
       Most important for this preface are the Qur’anic passages regard-
   ing the infant Mūsā. After Musa’s mother places him in an ark and sets
   him loose on the waters, he is discovered by members of Pharaoh’s
   household. At that point (Q 28:9), Pharaoh’s wife tells her spouse
   not to kill the infant, “for he will be a comfort for the eyes—for me
   and for you” (qurrat al-­ʿayn lī wa laka). In the end, Mūsā is returned
   to his distraught mother. At that point, the divine speaker addresses
   Mūsā: “We returned you to your mother that her eye might be com-
   forted and she grieve no more” (Q 20:40). When Ibn ʿArabī responds
   to Qurrat al-­ʿAyn by saying “for me,” his response can be read a kind
   of proposal or flirtation, but it is also a quote from the Qur’an that
   would, if read according to the implicit analogy it evokes, place Qur-
   rat al-­ʿAyn in the position of Mūsā and Ibn ʿArabī in the position of
   Pharaoh’s wife.
6. “Subtleties of mystical knowings”: laṭā’if al-­maʿārif. I have used “know-
   ings” here as a substantive in a manner parallel to Julian of Norwich’s
   “showings.” The two terms differ in important senses, of course, but
   both use a substantive gerund to shake loose aspects of intimacy that
   more common English terms lack.


                                                                  Notes 323
The Lockert Library of Poetry in Translation

George Seferis: Collected Poems, 1924–1955, translated, edited, and introduced
by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard
Collected Poems of Lucio Piccolo, translated and edited by Brian Swann and Ruth
   Feldman
C. P. Cavafy: Collected Poems, translated by Edmund Kelley and Philip Sherrard
   and edited by George Savidis
Benny Andersen: Selected Poems, translated by Alexander Taylor
Selected Poetry of Andrea Zanzotto, edited and translated by Ruth Feldman and
   Brian Swann
Poems of René Char, translated and annotated by Mary Ann Caws and Jonathan
   Griffin†
Selected Poems of Tudor Arghezi, translated by Michael Impey and Brian Swann
“The Survivor” and Other Poems, by Tadeusz Różewicz, translated and
   introduced by Magnus J. Krynski and Robert A. Maguire
“Harsh World” and Other Poems, by Angel González, translated by Donald D.
   Walsh
Ritsos in Parentheses, translated and introduced by Edmund Keeley
Salamander: Selected Poems of Robert Marteau, translated by Anne Winters
Angelos Sikelianos: Selected Poems, translated and introduced by Edmund
   Keeley and Philip Sherrard†
Dante’s “Rime,” translated by Patrick S. Diehl
Selected Later Poems of Marie Luise Kaschnitz, translated by Lisel Mueller
Osip Mandelstam’s “Stone,” translated and introduced by Robert Tracy†
The Dawn Is Always New: Selected Poetry of Rocco Scotellaro, translated by Ruth
   Feldman and Brian Swann
Sounds, Feelings, Thoughts: Seventy Poems by Wisława Szymborska, translated
   and introduced by Magnus J. Krynski and Robert A. Maguire
George Seferis: Collected Poems, 1924–1955, Expanded Edition [bilingual],
   translated, edited, and introduced by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard
The Man I Pretend to Be: “The Colloquies” and Selected Poems of Guido Gozzano,
   translated and edited by Michael Palma, with an introductory essay by
   Eugenio Montale


† Out of print
D’Après Tout: Poems by Jean Follain, translated by Heather McHugh†
Songs of Something Else: Selected Poems of Gunnar Ekelöf, translated by Leonard
    Nathan and James Larson
The Little Treasury of One Hundred People, One Poem Each, compiled by
    Fujiwara No Sadaie and translated by Tom Galt†
The Ellipse: Selected Poems of Leonardo Sinisgalli, translated by W. S. Di Pietro†
The Difficult Days by Roberto Sosa, translated by Jim Lindsey
Hymns and Fragments by Friedrich Hölderin, translated and introduced by
    Richard Sieburth
The Silence Afterwards: Selected Poems of Rolf Jacobsen, translated and edited by
    Roger Greenwald†
Rilke: Between Roots, selected poems rendered from the German by Rika
    Lesser†
In the Storm of Roses: Selected Poems, by Ingeborg Bachmann, translated, edited,
    and introduced by Mark Anderson†
Birds and Other Relations: Selected Poetry of Dezső Tandori, translated by Bruce
    Berlind
Brocade River Poems: Selected Works of the Tang Dynasty Courtesan Xue Tao,
    translated and introduced by Jeanne Larsen
The True Subject: Selected Poems of Faiz Ahmed Faiz, translated by Naomi
    Lazard
My Name on the Wind: Selected Poems of Diego Valeri, translated by Michael
    Palma
Aeschylus: The Suppliants, translated by Peter Burian
Foamy Sky: The Major Poems of Miklós Radnóti, selected and translated by
    Zsuzsanna Ozsváth and Frederick Turner†
C. P. Cavafy: Collected Poems, Revised Edition, translated and introduced by
    Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard, edited by George Savidis
La Fontaine’s Bawdy: Of Libertines, Louts, and Lechers, translated by Norman R.
    Shapiro†
A Child Is Not a Knife: Selected Poems of Göran Sonnevi, translated and edited by
    Rika Lesser
George Seferis: Collected Poems, Revised Edition [English only], translated,
    edited, and introduced by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard
Selected Poems of Shmuel HaNagid, translated by Peter Cole
The Late Poems of Meng Chiao, translated by David Hinton
Leopardi: Selected Poems, translated and introduced by Eamon Grennan
The Complete Odes and Satires of Horace, translated with introduction and notes
    by Sidney Alexander
Through Naked Branches: Selected Poems of Tarjei Vesaas, translated and edited
    by Roger Greenwald†
Selected Poems of Solomon Ibn Gabirol, translated by Peter Cole
Puerilities: Erotic Epigrams of “The Greek Anthology,” translated by Daryl Hine
Night Journey by María Negroni, translated by Anne Twitty
The Poetess Counts to 100 and Bows Out: Selected Poems by Ana Enriqueta Terán,
   translated by Marcel Smith
Nothing Is Lost: Selected Poems by Edvard Kocbek, translated by Michael
   Scammell and Veno Taufer, and introduced by Michael Scammell, with a
   foreword by Charles Simic
The Complete Elegies of Sextus Propertius, translated with introduction and notes
   by Vincent Katz
Knowing the East, by Paul Claudel, translated with introduction and notes by
   James Lawler
In Hora Mortis/Under the Iron of the Moon: Poems, by Thomas Bernhard,
   translated by James Reidel
Enough to Say It’s Far: Selected Poems of Pak Chaesam, translated by David R.
   McCann and Jiwon Shin
The Greener Meadow: Selected Poems by Luciano Erba, translated by Peter
   Robinson
The Dream of the Poem: Hebrew Poetry from Muslim and Christian Spain,
   950–1492, translated, edited, and introduced by Peter Cole
The Collected Lyric Poems of Luís de Camões, translated by Landeg White
C. P. Cavafy: Collected Poems, Bilingual Edition, translated by Edmund Keeley
   and Philip Sherrard, edited by George Savidis, with a new preface by Robert
   Pinsky
Poems Under Saturn: Poèmes saturniens, by Paul Verlaine, translated and with
   an introduction by Karl Kirchwey
Final Matters: Selected Poems, 2004–2010, by Szilárd Borbély, translated by
   Ottilie Mulzet
Selected Poems of Giovanni Pascoli, translated by Taije Silverman with Marina
   Della Putta Johnston
After Callimachus: Poems, by Stephanie Burt, with a foreword by Mark Payne
Dear Ms. Schubert: Poems by Ewa Lipska, translated by Robin Davidson and
   Ewa Elżbieta Nowakowska, with a foreword by Adam Zagajewski
The Translator of Desires by Muhyiddin Ibn ‘Arabi, translated by Michael Sells
